<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Acknowledgments</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="acknowledgments" epub:type="acknowledgments">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Acknowledgments</h2>
			<p>This book would have been impossible without the kindness, generosity, and grace of others. I will remain indebted to each scholar &amp; historian that devoted the time necessary to contribute an essay. They are listed, along with a little more information, in the most reasonable manner I could think of—by order of appearance.</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p><b>Stephen H. Browne</b> is a rhetorical critic and professor in the Department of Communication Arts &amp; Sciences at Penn State. He earned his BS at the University of Oregon in 1979, his MA at Colorado State University in 1982, and his PhD at the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 1987. Among the many books he has written, three are about United States presidents: <a href="https://amzn.to/3pRAFZA"><em>The First Inauguration: George Washington and the Invention of the Republic</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/397wSQO"><em>The Ides of War: George Washington and the Newburgh Crisis</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/2L4Fsbd"><em>Jefferson’s Call for Nationhood: The First Inaugural Address</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Kevin Butterfield</b> is the Executive Director of the Fred W. Smith National Library for the Study of George Washington at Mt. Vernon, the historic home of George Washington. Before that, Dr. Butterfield was the Director of the Institute for the American Constitutional Heritage and Constitutional Studies Program at the University of Oklahoma and the Wick Cary Professor and Associate Professor of Classics and Letters. Dr. Butterfield earned his BA in History from the University of Missouri, his MA in History from the College of William and Mary, and his PhD in History from Washington University in St. Louis. In 2015, he published <a href="https://amzn.to/2L3ko4V"><em>The Making of Tocqueville’s America: Law and Association in the Early United States</em></a>, an analysis of the associations among the people of the early United States.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Dr. <abbr class="name">R. M.</abbr> Barlow</b> is a Research Associate for <a href="http://www.masshist.org/adams/adams-family-papers">The Adams Papers</a> at the <a href="http://www.masshist.org/">Massachusetts Historical Society</a>. A specialist in early American diplomatic and military history, she earned her HBA in History at Lakehead University, her MA in Greek and Roman studies at the University of Calgary, and her MA and PhD in History from the University of Virginia.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Peter S. Onuf</b> is Professor Emeritus at the University of Virginia, where he held the Thomas Jefferson Memorial Foundation Professorship until his retirement. He earned his AB and PhD from Johns Hopkins. A noted Thomas Jefferson scholar, Dr. Onuf has authored several books about the third president, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3okqNXL"><em>“Most Blessed of the Patriarchs”: Thomas Jefferson and the Empire of the Imagination</em></a>, a <em>New York Times</em> Bestseller co-authored with Annette Gordon-Reed, <a href="https://amzn.to/3pONJ1G"><em>The Mind of Thomas Jefferson</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3hL2S17"><em>Jefferson’s Empire: The Language of American Nationhood</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/38faFRK"><em>Jeffersonian America</em></a> co-authored with Leonard Sadosky.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Annette Gordon-Reed</b> is the Carl M. Loeb University Professor of History at Harvard Law School. She earned her AB from Dartmouth and her JD from Harvard Law School. A noted legal scholar and historian, Professor Gordon-Reed is credited with changing the scholarship of Thomas Jefferson regarding his relationship with his slave, Sally Hemings. Her first book, <a href="https://amzn.to/3nbZFZG"><em>Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings: An American Controversy</em></a>, helped shed more light on this part of the third president’s life, and her 2008 book <a href="https://amzn.to/3b8pLug"><em>The Hemingses of Monticello</em></a> won 16 awards, including the 2008 National Book Prize and 2009 Pulitzer Prize in History. In 2011, she published <a href="https://amzn.to/38YyYmc"><em>Andrew Johnson</em></a> for The American Presidents Series, a short biography of the 17th president. In 2010, Gordon-Reed was conferred the National Humanities Medal by President Barack Obama and was awarded the MacArthur Fellowship. In 2019, she was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Stuart Leibiger</b> is professor and chair of the History Department at La Salle University. He received his BA from the University of Virginia and his MA and PhD from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. His book, <a href="https://amzn.to/39jeTaz"><em>Founding Friendship: George Washington, James Madison and the Creation of the American Republic</em></a>, was published by the University of Virginia Press in 1999. He has written numerous articles on the Founders for newspapers and historical magazines, journals, and encyclopedias, and has been a historical consultant for television documentaries and museums. He has worked on the editorial staffs of the <a href="https://washingtonpapers.org/">Papers of George Washington</a> and the <a href="https://jeffersonpapers.princeton.edu/">Papers of Thomas Jefferson</a>. In 2015, he won the George Washington Memorial Award, a lifetime achievement award for the study of George Washington given annually by the George Washington Masonic Memorial Association in Alexandria, Virginia. In 2016, he received La Salle University’s Lindback Distinguished Teaching Award.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>J. C. A. Stagg</b> is a professor at the University of Virginia and the editor of <a href="https://pjm.as.virginia.edu/">The Papers of James Madison</a>. He earned his BA and MA at the Univerity of Canterbury and his PhD from Princeton University. A leading authority on James Madison and an expert on the War of 1812, Dr. Stagg has edited and authored more than 20 books and monographs. <a href="https://www.upress.virginia.edu/series/papers-james-madison">The Papers of James Madison</a> are published by University of Virginia Press and provide rich and detailed primary-source material by the fourth president. Outside of the papers, Dr. Stagg published <a href="https://amzn.to/3baC893"><em>The War of 1812: Conflict for a Continent</em></a> in 2012, <a href="https://amzn.to/2KVWk44"><em>Borderlines in Borderlands: James Madison and the Spanish-American Frontier, 1776-1821</em></a> in 2009, and <a href="https://amzn.to/2JLCibG"><em>Mr. Madison’s War: Politics, Diplomacy, and Warfare in the Early American Republic, 1783-1830</em></a> in 1983.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Daniel Preston</b> is the recently retired editor of <a href="https://academics.umw.edu/jamesmonroepapers/">The Papers of James Monroe</a> at the University of Mary Washington. The project's goal is to publish ten scholarly volumes, the most recent of which is <a href="https://amzn.to/2XedA7a">Volume 7</a>, published in 2020. In 2008, Dr. Preston published <a href="https://amzn.to/3hMSmq5"><em>James Monroe: An Illustrated History</em></a>, which uses portraits, photographs, and art to help readers understand the fifth president.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Sandra Moats</b> is an Associate Professor in the History Department at the University of Wisconsin–Parkside. She earned her BA and MA from Smith College and her PhD from UCLA. In 2014, she was an Inaugural Research Fellow at George Washington’s Mount Vernon. In 2009, she published <a href="https://amzn.to/3oj8tym"><em>Celebrating the Republic: Presidential Ceremony and Popular Sovereignty, from Washington to Monroe</em></a>, examining how the actions and symbolic gestures of the first five presidents helped invent the political culture of today. Her second book, <em>Navigating Neutrality: George Washington and the American Government in the Turbulent Atlantic</em>, will be published by the University of Virginia Press in 2021.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Dr. C. James Taylor</b> is the former Editor-in-Chief of the Adams Papers at the Massachusetts Historical Society, having joined the project in 2002 after serving as the editor &amp; project director for The Papers of Henry Laurens. He currently edits the <a href="https://www.masshist.org/publications/jqadiaries/index.php/search">John Quincy Adams Digital Diary</a> at the Massachusetts Historical Society.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Harry L. Watson</b> is the Atlanta Distinguished Professor of Southern Culture at the University of North Carlina in Chapel Hill. He earned his AB from Brown University and his PhD from Northwestern University. His research focuses on the period between the Revolution and Civil War, with a particular interest in the antebellum South and Jacksonian America. In 1993, he was a founding editor of <em><a href="https://www.southerncultures.org/">Southern Cultures</a></em>, a peer-reviewed quarterly journal on the history, culture, society, and experience of the American South, and continued as editor until 2009. From 1999-2012, he directed the <a href="https://south.unc.edu/">UNC Center for the Study of the American South</a>. Dr. Watson has written several books, including <a href="https://www.bibliopen.org/p/bopen/9780226300658"><em>Building the American Republic, Volume 1: A Narrative History to 1877</em></a>], <a href="https://amzn.to/3bhU1mF"><em>Liberty and Power: The Politics of Jacksonian America</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3pLlmRY"><em>Andrew Jackson vs. Henry Clay: Democracy and Development in Antebellum America</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Thomas Coens</b> is an editor of the <a href="https://thepapersofandrewjackson.utk.edu/">Papers of Andrew Jackson</a> and Research Associate Professor of History at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. He earned his BA in history from Yale and his PhD from Harvard with a dissertation entitled <em>The Formation of the Jackson Party, 1822-1825</em>. Dr. Coens is working on a short history of Andrew Jackson and Indian Removal entitled <em>The Forked Tongue: Andrew Jackson, the 1830 Indian Removal Act, and the Betrayal of Native America</em>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Michael J. Gerhardt</b> is the Burton Craige Distinguished Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of North Carolina School of Law in Chapel Hill. He is director of the Center on Law and Government at UNC, a Scholar in Residence at the National Constitution Center, and Visiting Professor at the University of Pennsylvania Law School. He earned his BA at Yale, his MSc at the London School of Economics, and his JD from the University of Chicago Law School. He’s the author of seven books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/2L3w4EM"><em>The Forgotten Presidents: Their Untold Constitutional Legacy</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/358pzaD"><em>The Federal Impeachment Process: A Constitutional and Historical Analysis</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2XgkHM6"><em>The Power of Precedent</em></a>, and most recently <a href="https://amzn.to/3rW4dab"><em>Lincoln’s Mentors: The Education of a Leader</em></a>, an exploration of the impact five different men had on the life of Abraham Lincoln during the decade before his presidency.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Daniel Walker Howe</b> is Rhodes Professor of American History Emeritus at Oxford University in England and Professor of History Emeritus at UCLA. He earned his BA in American history and literature at Harvard, his MA from Magdalen College, Oxford, and his PhD in history at the University of California, Berkeley. He taught at Yale from 1966-73, UCLA from 1973-92 (where he chaired the history department), and Oxford from 1992-2002. He was the Harold Vyvyan Harmsworth Professor of American History at Oxford from 1989-1990. In 2008, Dr. Howe won the Pulitzer Prize in History for <a href="https://amzn.to/3hKR3YU"><em>What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848</em></a>, the 5th volume in the <em>Oxford History of the United States</em> series. It also won the 2007 American History Book Prize and was a finalist for the 2007 National Book Critics Circle Award for Nonfiction. Other books authored by Dr. Howe include <a href="https://amzn.to/2LrXEew"><em>Making the American Self: Jonathan Edwards to Abraham Lincoln</em></a> and <a href="https://amzn.to/3rWeRh0"><em>The Political Culture of the American Whigs</em></a>. In 2001, Dr. Howe served as the president of the Society for Historians of the Early American Republic and is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the Royal Historical Society.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Christopher J. Leahy</b> is a Professor of History at Keuka College. He earned his BA from Washington and Jefferson College, his MA from Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp; State University, and his PhD from Louisiana State University Baton Rouge. In 2020, Dr. Leahy published <a href="https://amzn.to/3rWWbxP"><em>President without a Party: The Life of John Tyler</em></a>, the most comprehensive biography of Tyler in more than half a century and the first academic study in 80 years.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Walter R. Borneman</b> is an American historian and lawyer. He earned his BA and MA from Western State College of Colorado and his JD from the University of Denver. He is the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/396xNRx"><em>Polk: The Man Who Transformed the Presidency and America</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2MBNY1T"><em>1812: The War The Forged a Nation</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3ba3snQ"><em>The French and Indian War: Deciding the Fate of North America</em></a>, and most recently <a href="https://amzn.to/3hLFMYb"><em>Brothers Down: Pearl Harbor and the Fate of the Many Brothers Aboard the USS Arizona</em></a>. He’s won awards from the Society of Colonial Wars in the State of New York, the Tennessee Library Association and Historical Commission, the Colorado Humanities Program, and the Samuel Eliot Morison Award for Naval Literature for <a href="https://amzn.to/38Zn63k"><em>The Admirals: Nimitz, Halsey, Leahy, and King–The Five-Star Admirals Who Won the War at Sea</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Michael F. Holt</b> is Langbourne M. Williams Professor of American History, Emeritus at the University of Virginia. He earned his BA from Princeton and his PhD from Johns Hopkins. He is the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/38WOleI"><em>Franklin Pierce</em></a> for the American Presidents Series, <a href="https://amzn.to/397A4Mz"><em>The Fate of Their Country: Politicians, Slavery Extension, and the Coming of the Civil War</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3nf4iSJ"><em>The Rise and Fall of the American Whig Party: Jacksonian Politics and the Onset of the Civil War</em></a>. He was the Pitt Professor of American History and Institutions, Cambridge University from 1993-94, a Fellow of the National Humanities Center for 1987-88, and won a National Endowment for the Humanities Senior Fellowship for 1976-77.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Claude Welch</b> is a SUNY Distinguished Service Professor and retired professor of the Department of Political Science at the University at Buffalo. He earned his BA at Harvard University and his PhD at Oxford University.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Peter A. Wallner</b> is a retired professor of history at Franklin Pierce College. He earned his BA from Waynesburg University and MA and PhD in <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> History from The Pennsylvania State University. Dr. Wallner wrote a two-volume history of Franklin Pierce: <a href="https://amzn.to/38iQwtW"><em>Franklin Pierce: New Hampshire’s Favorite Son</em></a> covers Pierce’s life up until the night of his inauguration, and <a href="https://amzn.to/38hcPAv"><em>Franklin Pierce: Martyr for the Union</em></a>; the duo comprises the first major reassessment of Pierce’s life, presidency, and legacy in 70 years.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Jean H. Baker</b> is an American historian and Professor Emerita of History at Goucher College. She earned her BA at Goucher College and her MA and PhD at Johns Hopkins. Dr. Baker is a member of the American Council of Learned Societies, the Organization of American Historians, the American Historical Association, and the Berkshire Conference of Women Historians. In 1982, she was a National Endowment for the Humanities fellow. She is the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3bb2SGp"><em>Mary Todd Lincoln: A Biography</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3niAYuK"><em>James Buchanan</em></a> for the American President’s Series, <a href="https://amzn.to/359g7ni"><em>Sisters: The Lives of America’s Suffragists</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3b8zSiI"><em>Margaret Sanger: A Life of Passion</em></a>, and most recently, <a href="https://amzn.to/3nq9eEF"><em>Building America: The Life of Benjamin Henry Latrobe</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>David S. Reynolds</b> is a Distinguished Professor of English at The Graduate Center at the City University of New York. He earned his BA from Amherst College and his PhD at the University of California, Berkeley. Before teaching at CUNY GC, Dr. Reynolds taught at Northwestern University, Barnard College, Rutgers University–Camden, NYU, Baruch College, and the New Sorbonne University. He’s the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3ohCAGd"><em>Abe: Abraham Lincoln in His Times</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3rXxCRu"><em>Mightier than the Sword: Uncle Tom’s Cabin and the Battle for America</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3rZ0Sr1"><em>Waking Giant: America in the Age of Jackson</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/38hbuJX"><em>John Brown, Abolitionist: The Man Who Killed Slavery, Sparked the Civil War, and Seeded Civil Rights</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/38YOqPe"><em>Walt Whitman’s America: A Cultural Biography</em></a>, a winner of the Bancroft Prize, the Ambassador Book Award, and a Finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Richard Carwardine</b> is a Welsh-born historian and Emeritus Rhodes Professor of American History at Corpus Christi College, Oxford. He focuses on the period of American history between 1776 and the Civil War, with a particular interest in the relationship between politics and religion of the era as well as the life, presidency, and legacy of Abraham Lincoln. He earned his BA and MA from Corpus Christi College and his PhD from The Queen’s College, Oxford. From 2010–2016, he served as President of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. Dr. Carwardine is the author of <a href="https://amzn.to/398dZgI"><em>Lincoln: A Life of Purpose and Power</em></a>, winner of the Lincoln Prize, <a href="https://amzn.to/3nhYEzk"><em>The Global Lincoln</em></a>, and <a href="https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300054132/evangelicals-and-politics-antebellum-america"><em>Evangelicals and Politics in Antebellum America</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Michael Les Benedict</b> is an American historian and Emeritus Professor of History at the Ohio State University. He earned his BA and MA from the University of Illinois and his PhD from Rice University. He served as Parliamentarian of the American Historical Association from 1988–2017 and is a past President of the Society for Historians of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era. He has been a visiting scholar at OSU Moritz College of Law and the University of Texas Law School. He’s written several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3pQ8ha7"><em>The Impeachment and Trial of Andrew Johnson</em></a> and <a href="https://amzn.to/2LllFEm"><em>The Blessings of Liberty</em></a>, and more than 50 articles and essays in history, law and political science journals and in edited volumes of essays on historical subjects.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Emerita Professor <b>Joan Waugh</b> of the UCLA History Department researches and writes about nineteenth-century America, specializing in the Civil War, Reconstruction, and Gilded Age eras. Waugh has published numerous essays and books on Civil War topics, both single-authored and edited, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3bc6Izd"><em>The American War: A History of the Civil War Era</em></a>, (Flip Learning, 2015; 2nd edition, 2019), co-written with Gary W. Gallagher, and her prize-winning <a href="https://amzn.to/38henuj"><em>U. S. Grant: American Hero, American Myth</em></a>, (University of North Carolina Press, 2009). The recipient of Huntington Library, NEH and Gilder-Lehrman fellowships, Professor Waugh is currently Co-President of the Society of Civil War Historians.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>John F. Marszalek</b> is an American historian and is the executive director of the Ulysses S. Grant Association’s Grant Presidential Library at Mississippi State University. He retired in 2002 as a Giles Distinguished Professor Emeritus. He has authored or edited 13 books and more than 250 articles &amp; book reviews. <a href="https://amzn.to/3swmsTV"><em>Sherman: A Soldier's Passion for Order</em></a> was a finalist for the Lincoln Prize, while <a href="https://amzn.to/35Nz2o3"><em>Assault at West Point, the Court Martial of Johnson Whittaker</em></a> was made into a film on Showtime. He serves on the board of advisors of the Lincoln Forum, the Lincoln Prize, the national Lincoln Bicentennial Commission, and the Monitor Museum.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Dustin McLochlin</b> is the Curator at the Rutherford B. Hayes Presidential Library and Museum and Instructor at Bowling Green State University. He earned his BA at Indiana University Kokomo and his MA &amp; PhD from Bowling Green State University.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Charles Calhoun</b> is Professor Emeritus of History at East Carolina University. He earned his BA from Yale University and his PhD from Columbia University. He has authored six books and edited four, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3s4Wqaj"><em>The Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3rYrfgr"><em>Benjamin Harrison</em></a> for the American Presidents Series, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3pPGoPu"><em>From Bloody Shirt to Full Dinner Pail: The Transformation of Politics and Governance in the Gilded Age</em></a>. Dr. Calhoun also served as president for the Society for Historians of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Walter Nugent</b> is the Andrew V. Tackes Professor of History emeritus at the University of Notre Dame, where he taught from 1984 until 2000. Before that, he taught at Kansas State University (1961-63) and Indiana University (1963-1984), where he was Associate Dean of the College of Arts &amp; Sciences (1967-71) and in the central administration (1971-76), director of the university’s overseas study programs (1967-76), and chair of the history department (1974-77). He earned his AB in history from St. Benedict’s College (Kansas) in 1954, the MA in Modern European from Georgetown University in 1956, and the PhD in American history at the University of Chicago in 1961. He’s written thirteen books as sole author and co-authored or been series co-editor on over a dozen others, notably (with Malcolm Rohrbaugh) the Trans-Appalachian West series of Indiana University Press. He has also published some two-hundred journal articles and book reviews. Among his books are <a href="https://amzn.to/2MDNIiT"><em>The Tolerant Populists, Second Edition: Kansas Populism and Nativism</em></a>, <a href="https://academic.oup.com/ahr/article-abstract/74/3/1093/90167?redirectedFrom=fulltext"><em>Money and American Society 1865-1880</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3a7ZHhP"><em>Structures of American Social History</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2Z5uMww"><em>Crossings: The Great Transatlantic Migrations 1870-1914</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2XkdPxb"><em>Into the West: The Story of Its People</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3bdoEcS"><em>Habits of Empire: A History of American Expansion</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/396K74f"><em>Progressivism: A Very Short Introduction</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3a9r8YS"><em>Color Coded: Party Politics in the American West 1950-2016</em></a>. He has been a Guggenheim fellow, twice a long-term fellow at the Huntington Library, twice a Fulbright senior lecturer (Jerusalem 1978-79, Dublin 1991-92), and directed NEH summer seminars for college teachers in 1979, 1984, and 1986. He has been president of the Indiana Association of Historians, the Society for Historians of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era, and the Western History Association.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Mark W. Summers</b> is the Thomas D. Clark Professor of History at the University of Kentucky. He earned his PhD from the University of California, Berkeley. He’s written several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/2MycmkR"><em>A Dangerous Stir: Fear, Paranoia, and the Making of Reconstruction</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/38dNwz7"><em>Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion: The Making of a President, 1884</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3bg06zN"><em>The Press Gang: Newspapers and Politics, 1865-1878</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Allan B. Spetter</b> is Professor Emeritus of History at Wright State University, where he also chaired the history department. He earned his PhD from Rutgers in 1967. He is the co-author of <a href="https://amzn.to/2XfgW9W"><em>The Presidency of Benjamin Harrison</em></a> with Homer E. Socolofsky. The book serves as a study of a president that, like the other Gilded Age presidents, is often forgotten.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Matthew Algeo</b> is an award-winning journalist and author. He holds a degree in Folklore from the University of Pennsylvania. He has written six books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3oiGjDC"><em>The President Is a Sick Man</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3hNEmMM"><em>Harry Truman’s Excellent Adventure</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3hJrLul"><em>All This Marvelous Potential</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/35fpBNT"><em>Abe &amp; Fido</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Christopher Capozzola</b> is a Professor of History at MIT. He earned his AB from Harvard College and his PhD from Columbia University. He is the author of two books: <a href="https://amzn.to/359IGRp"><em>Bound by War: How the United States and the Philippines Built America’s First Pacific Century</em></a> and <a href="https://amzn.to/2Llqi1c"><em>Uncle Sam Wants You: World War I and the Making of the Modern American Citizen</em></a>, which won the Lois P. Rudnick Book Prize of the New England American Studies Association. In 2018, he was awarded the MacVicar Faculty Fellowship for Undergraduate Teaching at MIT and has been a Distinguished Lecturer of the Organization of American Historians since 2011.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Christopher McKnight Nichols</b> is an Associate Professor of History at Oregon State University and Director of the Oregon State University Center for the Humanities. Dr. Nichols is a scholar of the intellectual history of the US’s role in the world, with a focus on isolationism, internationalism, and globalization. Nichols is also an expert on US intellectual, cultural, and political history with an emphasis on the Gilded Age &amp; Progressive Era through the present. He’s the author &amp; editor of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/2JSYmkU"><em>Promise and Peril</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2XfhpsI"><em>Prophesies of Godlessness</em></a> (co-edited, co-authored with Charles Matthews), <a href="https://amzn.to/3hMjMwo"><em>The Oxford Encyclopedia of American Military and Diplomatic History</em></a> (co-edited with David Milne and Timothy Lynch), <a href="https://www.wiley.com/en-us/A+Companion+to+the+Gilded+Age+and+Progressive+Era-p-9781118913963"><em>The Wiley Blackwell Companion to the Gilded Age and Progressive Era</em></a> (co-edited with Nancy Unger), and the upcoming <a href="https://amzn.to/3njx18U"><em>Rethinking American Grand Strategy</em></a> (co-edited with Elizabeth Borgwardt and Andrew Preston). He has been elected a permanent member of the Council on Foreign Relations, is on the Board of Trustees of the Oregon Historical Society, and was awarded the Andrew Carnegie Fellowship in 2016.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Jean M. Yarbrough</b> is the Gary M. Pendy, Sr. Professor of Social Sciences at Bowdoin College. She’s received two fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities—for 1983–84, when she was named a Bicentennial Fellow, and again for 2005–06, for the “We The People” initiative. She earned her BA from Cedar Crest College and her MA &amp; PhD from The New School. She’s written and edited several books about Thomas Jefferson &amp; Theodore Roosevelt, including <a href="https://amzn.to/2JLGwQz"><em>Theodore Roosevelt and the American Political Tradition</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2XkeU8d"><em>The Essential Jefferson</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/38YVhYY"><em>American Virtues: Thomas Jefferson on the Character of a Free People</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Jonathan Lurie</b> is Professor Emeritus of History at Rutgers University. He earned his AB and MA from Harvard and his PhD from the University of Wisconsin, Madison. In 2005, Dr. Lurie was Fulbright Lecturer at Uppsala University Law School in Sweden and a Visiting Professor of Law at West Point in 1994–1995. Dr. Lurie is the author of <a href="https://amzn.to/3pQeMK3"><em>William Howard Taft: The Travails of a Progressive Conservative</em></a>, an assessment of Taft as a Progressive-Conservative, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3rWhIGT"><em>The Chief Justiceship of William Howard Taft</em></a>, a look at his distinguished role as the only president also to serve on the Supreme Court.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Robert Enholm</b> is the former Executive Director of the Woodrow Wilson House and Global Fellow at the Wilson Center, a think tank that focuses on bridging the divide between policy and ideas. He earned his BA from the University of California, Davis and his JD from the University of California, Berkeley. Before being a director at the Woodrow Wilson House, he served at the United Nations in New York in the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as Chief of the Central Emergency Response Fund Secretariat, where he helped establish a $500 million international humanitarian relief fund.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>John Milton Cooper</b> is an American historian and Professor Emeritus of History at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. He earned his BA from Princeton and his MA &amp; PhD from Columbia University. Dr. Coopper taught at the University of Wisconsin, Madison for almost 40 years, where he held two endowed professorships. He was awarded the Guggenheim Fellowship for 1979–1980 and the Fulbright Professorship in United States history at Moscow State University for 1987. His 2009 biography <a href="https://amzn.to/3923WK8"><em>Woodrow Wilson: A Biography</em></a> was a finalist for the 2010 Pulitzer Prize in Biography. Dr. Cooper has written widely on Wilson and his era, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3hSfEen"><em>Breaking the Heart of the World: Woodrow Wilson and the Fight for the League of Nations</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3hLQQVd"><em>Pivotal Decades: The United States, 1900-1920</em></a>. For more than twenty years, he served on the Editorial Advisory Committee to the <a href="https://press.princeton.edu/series/papers-of-woodrow-wilson">Papers of Woodrow Wilson</a>, edited by Arthur S. Link.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>James Robenalt</b> is an American lawyer and author. He earned his BA from Miami University and his JD from Ohio State University College of Law. With John W. Dean, he created The Watergate CLE, a continuing legal education program. His books include <a href="https://amzn.to/2Xaswmy"><em>Ballots and Bullets: Black Power Politics and Urban Guerrilla Warfare in 1968 Cleveland</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3rX8w51"><em>The Harding Affair: Love and Espionage during the Great War</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3b8dPsx"><em>January 1973: Watergate, Roe v. Wade, Vietnam, and the Month That Changed America Forever</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Amity Shlaes</b> is an American author and columnist and currently serves as the chair of the board of trustees at the Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation. She earned her BA in English from Yale. She’s the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3nci60k"><em>Coolidge</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3hL3x2I"><em>The Forgotten Man: A New History of the Great Depression</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2JL41t0"><em>The Greedy Hand: How Taxes Drive Americans Crazy and What to Do About It</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/38dPnnz"><em>Great Society: A New History</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Kendrick A. Clements</b> is Professor Emeritus of History at the University of South Carolina. He earned his BA from Williams College and his MA &amp; PhD from the University of California, Berkeley. In addition to several articles, he’s published seven books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/38fi1EL"><em>Hoover, Conservation, and Consumerism: Engineering the Good Life</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3ovnJbD"><em>The Life of Herbert Hoover: Imperfect Visionary, 1918–1928</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3ohIuaB"><em>The Presidency of Woodrow Wilson</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Cynthia M. Koch</b> is Historian in Residence and Director of History Programing for the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Foundation at Adams House, Harvard College. She was Director of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum in Hyde Park from 1999–2011, after which she served as Senior Advisor to the Office of Presidential Libraries at the National Archives in Washington, <abbr class="postal">DC</abbr>. Dr. Koch earned her BA in History from Penn State University and her MA &amp; PhD in American Civilization from the University of Pennsylvania.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>David M. Kennedy</b> is the Donald J. McLachlan Professor of History Emeritus at Stanford University. He is also the current editor of <em>The Oxford History of the United States</em>, an ongoing multi-volume history of the United States published by Oxford University Press. He earned his BA in history from Stanford and his MA &amp; PhD in American Studies from Yale. Dr. Kennedy was the Harold Vyvyan Harmsworth Professor of American History at Oxford University in 1995–1996 and is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society. He’s authored several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3pRTWKd">Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929-1945</a>, the 9th volume in the <em>Oxford History of the United States</em> and a recipient of the 2000 Pulitzer Prize in History, the 2000 Francis Parkman Prize, the Commonwealth Club of California’s Gold Medal for Literature, and the 2000 Ambassador Book Award, <a href="https://amzn.to/2LsaE3O"><em>Over Here: The First World War and American Society</em></a>, a 1981 Pulitzer Prize finalist, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3pT2IaV"><em>Birth Control in America</em></a>, a winner of the 1970 John Gilmary Shea Prize and the 1971 Bancroft Prize.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Michael Kazin</b> is a professor of history at Georgetown University and the editor emeritus of <a href="https://www.dissentmagazine.org/"><em>Dissent</em></a> magazine. He earned his BA from Harvard, his MA from Portland State University, and his PhD from Stanford. In 2020, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He has won fellowships from the Guggenheim Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities and has been a Fulbright scholar in the Netherlands and Japan. Dr. Kazin is the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3hJMCgW"><em>A Godly Hero: The Life of William Jennings Bryan</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/38hgCxK"><em>The Populist Persuasion: An American History</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2Xg9lrr"><em>War Against War: The American Fight for Peace, 1914-1918</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3pLzY3M"><em>American Dreamers: How the Left Changed a Nation</em></a>. His seventh book, a history of the Democratic Party, will be published next year.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>David B. Woolner</b> is Senior Fellow and Resident Historian of the Roosevelt Institute, Professor of History at Marist College, and Senior Fellow of the Center for Civic Engagement at Bard College. He earned his BA in English Literature and History from the University of Minnesota, his MA in History from McGill University, and his PhD in International History from McGill University. He has authored or edited numerous works, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3hIPJ90"><em>The Last 100 Days: FDR at War and at Peace</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2XescDy"><em>Progressivism in America: Past, Present, and Future</em></a> (co-edited with Jack Thompson), <a href="https://amzn.to/3nk9qVL"><em>FDR’s World: War, Peace, and Legacies</em></a> (co-edited with Warren Kimball and David Reynolds) and <a href="https://amzn.to/3hMm6n6"><em>FDR and the Environment</em></a> (co-edited with Henry Henderson).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Andrew Busch</b> is the Crown Professor of Government and George R. Roberts Fellow at Claremont McKenna College, where he also serves as the Director of the Rose Institute of State and Local Government. He earned his BA from the University of Colorado-Boulder and his MA &amp; PhD at the University of Virginia. Dr. Busch has authored or co-authored more than 15 books on American politics, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3hXnZh7"><em>The Rules and Politics of American Primaries</em></a>, <a href="https://www.amazon.com/Defying-Odds-Elections-American-Politics-ebook/dp/B06XNSYRYH/ref=sr_1_2?dchild=1&amp;qid=1603847613&amp;refinements=p_27%3AAndrew+E.+Busch&amp;s=digital-text&amp;sr=1-2&amp;text=Andrew+E.+Busch"><em>Defying the Odds: The 2016 Elections and American Politics</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/35dlCBD"><em>Reagan’s Victory: The Presidential Election of 1980 and the Rise of the Right</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3hMzs2X"><em>Truman’s Triumphs: The 1948 Election and the Making of Postwar America</em></a>. In 2007, he was awarded a Fulbright fellowship to teach American politics at the Diplomatic Academy of Ukraine. He served as the Ann and Herbert Vaughan Fellow in the James Madison Program in American Ideals and Institutions at Princeton University from 2009–2010.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Michael J. Birkner</b> is an American historian and professor of history at Gettysburg College. His focus is on 19th- and 20th-century America and is known for his work on Dwight D. Eisenhower. He earned his BA from Gettysburg College and his MA &amp; PhD from the University of Virginia. Dr. Birkner has authored several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/2JNeQLb"><em>The Governors of New Jersey: Biographical Essays</em></a> and <a href="https://cupola.gettysburg.edu/books/81/"><em>Encounters With Eisenhower</em></a>, and has co-edited three volumes on James Buchanan, the latest of which is <a href="https://amzn.to/38ho385"><em>The Worlds of James Buchanan and Thaddeus Stevens: Place, Personality, and Politics in the Civil War Era</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Louis Galambos</b> is an American historian and Research Professor at Johns Hopkins University, where he is also the editor of the <a href="https://eisenhower.press.jhu.edu/">Papers of Dwight D. Eisenhower</a>, a 21 volume, 14,000-page collection. He earned his BA in history from Indiana University and his MA &amp; PhD from Yale. From 1975–78, he was the co-editor of the <em>Journal of Economic History</em>. In addition to the volumes of the <em>Papers</em>, Dr. Galambos is the author of <a href="https://amzn.to/39jwL59"><em>Eisenhower: Becoming the Leader of the Free World</em></a> and <a href="https://amzn.to/38jD3lX"><em>The Creative Society—and the Price Americans Paid for It</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Barbara Ann Perry</b> is the Gerald L. Baliles Professor and Director of Presidential Studies at the University of Virginia’s Miller Center, a scholar of the American presidency and Supreme Court, and a biographer of the Kennedys. She co-chairs the <a href="https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-oral-histories">Presidential Oral History program</a>, a public service project meant to preserve the thoughts and recollections of officials who worked in past presidencies. She earned her BA in Political Science from the University of Louisville, her MA in PPE from Hertford College, Oxford, and her PhD in American history from the University of Virginia. She is the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/35ctYcB"><em>Jacqueline Kennedy: First Lady of the New Frontier</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3pPQZtI"><em>Rose Kennedy: The Life and Times of a Political Matriarch</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3rWjIyW"><em>41: Inside the Presidency of George H. W. Bush</em></a> (edited with Michael Nelson), <a href="https://amzn.to/398C9bb"><em>42: Inside the Presidency of Bill Clinton</em></a> (edited with Michael Nelson &amp; Russell Riley), and <a href="https://amzn.to/3bjENgC"><em>Edward M. Kennedy: An Oral History</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Mark K. Updegrove</b> is the president and CEO of the LBJ Foundation and serves as Presidential Historian for <abbr class="initialism">ABC</abbr> News. From 2009 to 2017, he was the director of the LBJ Presidential Library where he hosted the 2014 Civil Rights Summit, which included Barack Obama, George W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and Jimmy Carter. Updegrove is the author of four books on the presidency including <a href="https://amzn.to/2XgaTlf"><em>The Last Republicans: Inside the Extraordinary Relationship Between George H.W. Bush and George W. Bush</em></a> and <a href="https://amzn.to/3bcisSo"><em>Indomitable Will: LBJ in the Presidency</em></a>. He has written for The New York Times, Politico, The Daily Beast, The Hill, and Time Magazine, and has appeared regularly on CNN and MSNBC. He has conducted exclusive interviews with six U.S. Presidents.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Ken Hughes</b> is an American historian and expert on secret presidential recordings. He’s spent two decades scouring the <a href="https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/secret-white-house-tapes">Secret White House Tapes</a> and shedding light on what they reveal. He earned his BS at Cornell University. He’s the author of two books, <a href="https://amzn.to/3rYw1dR"><em>Chasing Shadows: The Nixon Tapes, the Chennault Affair, and the Origins of Watergate</em></a> and <a href="https://amzn.to/3ni79dI"><em>Fatal Politics: The Nixon Tapes, the Vietnam War, and the Casualties of Reelection</em></a>, with a third, regarding President Kennedy's role in the coup that overthrew South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem and led to his assassination, entitled <em>Mortal Consequences</em> on the way.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Thomas A. Schwartz</b> is an American historian and Distinguished Professor of History at Vanderbilt University. He earned his AB in History from Columbia, his MA in History from Oxford, and his AM and PhD in History from Harvard. He is a past president of the Society of Historians of American Foreign Relations. He is the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/38he1E3"><em>Henry Kissinger and American Power: A Political Biography</em></a>, <a href="https://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674432994"><em>America’s Germany</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/2XbtM8T"><em>Lyndon Johnson and Europe: In the Shadow of Vietnam</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>John Robert Greene</b> is an American historian and Paul J. Schupf Professor of History at Cazenovia College. He earned his BA and MA in History from St. Bonaventure University and his PhD from Syracuse University’s Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. An expert on the American presidency, his works include <a href="https://amzn.to/2LsvRuv"><em>I Like Ike: The Presidential Election of 1952</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3hJCS6v"><em>The Presidency of George H. W. Bush</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3rSwEpD"><em>Betty Ford: Candor and Courage in the White House</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/2LnHzGS"><em>The Presidency of Gerald R. Ford</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Mark Atwood Lawrence</b> is the director of the LBJ Presidential Library. Before that, he was Associate Professor of History, Distinguished Fellow at the Robert S. Strauss Center for International Security and Law, and Director of Graduate Studies at the Clements Center for National Security at The University of Texas at Austin. He earned his BA from Stanford and his PhD from Yale, where he was also a history lecturer. He has published several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/3hJFYr7"><em>The Vietnam War: A Concise International History</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2XdtL4v"><em>The Vietnam War: An International History in Documents</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/2JNBe7j"><em>Assuming the Burden: Europe and the American Commitment to War in Vietnam</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Gil Troy</b> is an American presidential historian and Professor of History at McGill University. He earned his BA, MA, and PhD from Harvard University. He helped found the Engaging Israel Program at the Shalom Hartman Institute, which helps improve the discourse surrounding Israel. He’s the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/2Xd5fQT"><em>The Age of Clinton: America in the 1990s</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/38jEC3j"><em>The Reagan Revolution: A Very Short Introduction</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3rYD7iM"><em>Morning in America</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3hMnru9"><em>Leading from the Center</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Iwan Morgan</b> is Emeritus Professor of US Studies at the Institute of the Americas, University College London. He earned his BA in History from the University of Wales, Aberystwyth, and his PhD in International History from the London School of Economics. His books include <a href="https://amzn.to/3pRh7V1"><em>The Age of Deficits: Presidents and Unbalanced Budgets from Jimmy Carter to George W. Bush</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2XaDicF"><em>Reagan: American Icon</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3baNDxi"><em>Nixon</em></a>. He’s currently working on a book about Franklin D. Roosevelt, <em>FDR: Transformational President in Depression and War</em>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Mary Kate Cary</b> is a former speechwriter for President George H. W. Bush, helping write more than 100 addresses, and an executive producer for <a href="http://www.41on41.com/">41on41</a>, a documentary about the president. In addition to being a speechwriter and documentarian, she teaches political speechwriting as an adjunct professor in the Politics Department at the University of Virginia and is a senior fellow at UVA’s Miller Center. She earned her BA in International Relations from the University of Virginia.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Steven M. Gillon</b> is Scholar-in-Residence at The History Channel and a professor of history at The University of Oklahoma. He earned his BA in History from Widener University and his AM &amp; PhD in American Civilization from Brown. He taught at Yale for nine years and then as University Lecturer in Modern History at Oxford University. He has authored or edited several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/38jFapT"><em>The Pact: Bill Clinton, Newt Gingrich, and the Rivalry that Defined a Generation</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3njBGHW"><em>Separate and Unequal: The Kerner Commission and the Unraveling of American Liberalism</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/3ohNc81"><em>America’s Reluctant Prince: The Life of John F. Kennedy Jr.</em></a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Russell Riley</b> is co-chair of the Miller Center’s Presidential Oral History Program and is the White Burkett Miller Center Professor of Ethics and Institutions. A leading authority on elite oral history interviewing and the contemporary presidency, Dr. Riley has logged more than 1,500 hours of confidential interviews with senior members of the White House staff, cabinet officers, and foreign leaders since the Carter administration. He earned his BA from Auburn University and his PhD from the University of Virginia. He’s authored or edited six books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/35d4Dzo"><em>Inside the Clinton White House</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/2LsZ34U"><em>Bridging the Constitutional Divide</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/38Z0G2c"><em>The President’s Words: Speeches and Speechwriting in the Modern White House</em></a> (co-edited with Michael Nelson).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>James Mann</b> is an American journalist &amp; author and is a scholar-in-residence at Johns Hopkins. He wrote for the <em>Los Angeles Times</em> for more than 20 years and had stints earlier at <em>The Washington Post</em> and the <em>The Baltimore Sun</em>. He’s the author of several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/35cwhMN"><em>Rise of the Vulcans: The History of Bush’s War Cabinet</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/3bg6BCH"><em>George W. Bush</em></a> for the American Presidents Series, <a href="https://amzn.to/359OkD5"><em>The Obamians: The Struggle Inside the White House to Redefine American Power</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/35d4Y58"><em>About Face: A History of America’s Curious Relationship With China</em></a> and <em><a href="https://amzn.to/3sTplhI">The Great Rift: Dick Cheney, Colin Powell, and the Broken Friendship That Defined an Era</a></em>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Mark J. Rozell</b> is the Founding Dean of the Schar School of Policy and Government at George Mason University, where he also holds the Ruth D. &amp; John T. Hazel chair in public policy. He earned his BA in Political Science from Eisenhower College of Rochester Institute of Technology, his MA in Public Administration from the University of Virginia, and his PhD in Politics from the University of Virginia. He’s the author of nine books and the editor of 20 more, some of which include <a href="https://amzn.to/3baOfmA"><em>Federalism: A Very Short Introduction</em></a> (with Clyde Wilcox), <a href="https://amzn.to/3pPeumE"><em>The South and the Transformation of U.S. Politics</em></a> (with Charles S. Bullock, III, Susan A. MacManus, and Jeremy D. Mayer), and <a href="https://amzn.to/3rYEbTO"><em>Executive Privilege: Presidential Power, Secrecy, and Accountability</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Tracy Denean Sharpley-Whiting</b> is the Gertrude Conaway Vanderbilt Distinguished Professor of French in the Department of French and Italian at the Vanderbilt University College of Arts and Science, as well as the Chair of African American and Diaspora Studies. She earned her BA in French Literature and African American Studies at the University of Rochester and her PhD in French Studies from Brown University. She has authored several books, including <a href="https://amzn.to/35fQnFM"><em>Bricktop’s Paris: African American Women in Paris between the Two World Wars</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/35fwajt"><em>Black France / France Noire: The History and Politics of Blackness</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/2JQ8pXS"><em>The Speech: Race and Barack Obama’s ‘A More Perfect Union’</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>James T. Kloppenberg</b> is the Charles Warren Professor of American History at Harvard. He earned his AB at Dartmouth and his MA &amp; PhD at Stanford. Dr. Kloppenberg has been awarded fellowships from the Guggenheim, Danforth, and Whiting foundations, the American Council of Learned Societies, and the National Endowment for the Humanities. In 2015, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He’s the author of four books and the co-editor of two more, including <a href="https://amzn.to/2L3LzMZ"><em>Reading Obama: Dreams, Hope, and the American Political Tradition</em></a>, <a href="https://amzn.to/35dxByQ"><em>The Virtues of Liberalism</em></a>, and <a href="https://amzn.to/2XdFfox"><em>Toward Democracy: The Struggle for Self-Rule in European and American Thought</em></a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><b>Nicholas F. Jacobs</b> is Visiting Assistant Professor of Government at Colby College. He earned his BA in Political Science from the University of Mary Washington and his MA &amp; PhD in Government from the University of Virginia. He has been awarded several fellowships, including the Beeke-Levy Fellowship from the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, the Humane Studies Fellowship from the Institute for Humane Studies, the Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. Fellowship from the JFK Library, and the Moody Foundation Research Fellowship from the LBJ Library. His work appears in numerous journals, including <em>Perspectives on Politics</em>, <em>Political Science Quarterly</em>, <em>Publius: The Journal of Federalism</em>, <em>Presidential Studies Quarterly</em>, <em>Political Research Quarterly</em>, <em>Studies in American Political Development</em>, <em>Journal of Policy History</em>, <em>Education and Urban Society</em>, and <em>The Forum</em>.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>I also wanted to thank others that helped make this book possible through their recommendations: Sara Martin at the Massachusetts Historical Society, Elizabeth Chew at Montpelier, Jack Rakove at Stanford, Robert Cherny at SFSU, Jeffrey Rosen at the National Constitution Center, and Ira Katznelson at Columbia University.</p>
			<p>Thanks also to my family, who has been nothing but supportive as I worked on this book through a pandemic. Especial thanks to my late grandmother and grandfather, Ranjit Kaur and Paramjit Singh; both were teachers and instilled a love of reading in my youth that never left.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
