<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 30</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The President Without a Party</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Christopher J. Leahy</h3>
			<p>John Tyler’s accession to the presidency marked the first time in American history that a vice president took over the nation’s highest office because of the death of the incumbent⁠&mdash;in this case, William Henry Harrison. Upon Harrison’s passing on Palm Sunday, April 4, 1841, his cabinet dispatched two messengers to Tyler’s home in Williamsburg, Virginia, with instructions to bring the vice president back to Washington, where he could take the reins of the government. Arriving in the capital around 4:00 AM on Tuesday, April 6, Tyler checked into a suite at Brown’s Indian Queen Hotel. Fully aware that Harrison’s death had created a potentially dangerous constitutional crisis, and imbued with a sense of the historical significance of the moment, Tyler took steps to ensure that he established himself as president of the United States. Later that morning, he took the oath of office in the parlor of the hotel and immediately made clear that he was in charge. “I am the President,” he declared, “and I shall be held responsible for my administration.”</p>
			<p>Three days later, Tyler took another step to establish himself as chief executive when he delivered what amounted to an inaugural address before a small audience at the Capitol. Not nearly as long as a typical inaugural address, and unaccompanied by the traditional pomp and ceremony of a normal inauguration, Tyler’s remarks focused on three areas⁠&mdash;foreign affairs, the federal government’s patronage system, and financial matters⁠&mdash;and also included a summary statement of his political principles. Tyler believed that the American people deserved to hear from him and he wanted to lay out some general plans of public policy. He also aimed to reassure the nation that, despite the calamity of Harrison’s death, the government would continue to function smoothly and without interruption.</p>
			<p>As he prepared a rough draft of his address, Tyler included a section that renounced his desire to seek a presidential term in his own right in 1844. Before leaving Williamsburg to travel to Washington, he spoke briefly with his neighbor and friend, Nathaniel Beverley Tucker. Tucker, a professor at the nearby College of William and Mary, advised Tyler to assert from the start that he would merely serve out the reminder of Harrison’s term and retire. Tucker recognized that despite Tyler’s nomination and election to the vice presidency as a Whig in November 1840, his long-standing political principles of states’ rights, strict construction of the Constitution, and limited federal power did not comport with the nationalist-oriented ideology of the mainstream of the party. Tucker worried that leading Whigs such as Senator Henry Clay, now in command of a newly-won majority, would seek to dominate Tyler and force him to accept the party’s entire agenda. Moreover, the opposition Democrats might attempt to exploit this potentially difficult relationship between the new president and Congress, which would tear Tyler “in pieces as by wild horses” if he appeared overly ambitious. In Tucker’s view, disclaiming a desire to stand for election in 1844 would allow Tyler to govern while other contenders for the presidency⁠&mdash;including Clay⁠&mdash;jockeyed for position. Tyler could thus adopt the pose of a disinterested statesman who only had the best interests of the nation at heart.</p>
			<p>Tucker underestimated Tyler’s ambition. The statement disavowing a second term did not survive revisions to the address. The new president intended to seek his own term in 1844. In fact, the best way to read the majority of Tyler’s inaugural address is to interpret it as the opening salvo in his own campaign for the White House, though he made no overt statement in the address announcing his intentions. Not content with being remembered only as the man who had replaced William Henry Harrison, Tyler began to lay the groundwork for his campaign mere days after taking office.</p>
			<p>The section covering foreign affairs was the most cursory of the address but nevertheless imparted a strong message. Tyler had been briefed by Secretary of State Daniel Webster on the progress of the case against Alexander McLeod, a Canadian who had been indicted for murder and arson by the state of New York for his role in the destruction of the <i>Caroline</i> in December 1837. The <i>Caroline</i> was an American steamer that conveyed supplies to Canadian rebels who were defying British authority in the area around Niagara Falls. McLeod had allegedly aided a contingent of British soldiers who boarded the ship with the intention of putting an end to the on-going insurrection. In the melee that ensued an American named Amos Durfee had been killed&mdash;shot through the head with a musket ball. McLeod had bragged of his role in the so-called <i>Caroline</i> affair and faced the death penalty if a jury in New York found him guilty of his alleged crimes. Britain had made clear to the US government that such an outcome could result in war, because, as a Canadian, McLeod was a British subject. Furthermore, Whitehall maintained that McLeod’s actions had been undertaken as a military necessity and with the concurrence of military authorities in Canada. The general statement in Tyler’s inaugural address that asserted his desire to “sedulously cultivate the relations of peace and amity with one and all,” alluded to the tensions between the United States and Britain over McLeod’s fate. Tyler further made clear, however, that “the honor” of his country “shall sustain no blemish” on his watch. What he had done with this statement was adopt a firm posture towards Britain that he hoped would buy him time to work behind the scenes to secure a not-guilty verdict for McLeod in a New York court. With the aid of Webster, he succeeded. Moreover, he and the secretary of state accomplished a tremendous feat in 1842, when they secured the Webster-Ashburton Treaty with Britain, a pact that, among other things, settled a long-standing border dispute between Maine and Canada.</p>
			<p>Domestic political circumstances influenced the remainder of Tyler’s inaugural address. He paid lip service to the Whig argument that Democratic Presidents Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren had abused the federal patronage, or “spoils system,” by appointing and removing office holders based solely on their partisanship. He decried the practice and even suggested he would be willing to work with the Whig congressional majority to remedy the “evils” inherent in the system.</p>
			<p>He did not mean it. In fact, Tyler used his inaugural address to put the Whigs on notice that he would not hesitate to remove appointed officials who sought to advance the party’s agenda at the expense of his administration. He signaled his willingness to act in behalf of his own political interests through patronage if circumstances demanded it. Tyler evidently intended to attempt to build a political base for himself using the presidential power to appoint and remove officeholders. Far from taking the advice of his friend Tucker and declaring he would not seek a term of his own in 1844, the new president was laying the groundwork for his political advancement. And he intended to head the Whigs off if they interfered with his overriding goal of winning the presidency in his own right.</p>
			<p>With a similar objective in mind, Tyler also addressed the state of the nation’s finances. The effects of an economic depression known to history as the Panic of 1837 lingered as Tyler assumed the presidency. Indeed, Henry Clay had persuaded President Harrison to call a special session of Congress for the summer of 1841 so that the Whig majority could take steps to alleviate the country’s financial woes. Tyler was not keen on the special session, but recognized astutely that Clay and his comrades intended to repeal President Van Buren’s ineffective Independent Treasury, which had hampered the nation’s currency system, and charter a new national bank as the signature feature of their economic recovery program. Tyler favored repeal of the Independent Treasury, but would not cede control of the process to create an appropriate financial institution to Clay. He asserted his willingness to sign “any constitutional measure” the Congress devised that would provide for the “restoration of a sound circulating medium.”</p>
			<p>But therein lay the rub. Tyler proclaimed that he would follow the example of “the fathers of the great republican school”&mdash;Jefferson and Madison&mdash;as he determined the constitutionality of the bank the Whigs were sure to create during the special session. As president, he retained the veto power and would be the ultimate arbiter of whether such a bank passed constitutional muster. This portion of the address served to remind the American people as well as the Whigs&mdash;of his longstanding political principles. Without calling it by name, Tyler returned here to the compact theory of government spelled out in the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, authored by those republican fathers in 1798, that he believed properly articulated the “balance” between the federal government and the states. He could not have made any clearer his intention to abide by the states’ rights, strict construction, limited government ideology that had guided him throughout his long career in politics. With this section of the inaugural, he thus set the stage for the inevitable clash with the Whig majority that would result in his banishment from their ranks as he became a president without a party.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
