<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 92</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-92" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of Dwight D. Eisenhower</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Michael J. Birkner</h3>
			<p>Always a distinctive moment in the life of a nation, the inauguration of a new chief executive takes on special significance when a transition from one party to another is involved.  The inauguration of Dwight D. Eisenhower as the nation’s 34th president, moreover, was conducted in the midst of a stalemated war in Korea, a war that was one of the factors contributing to Eisenhower’s decisive victory over Democrat Adlai Stevenson in November 1952.</p>
			<p>Eisenhower’s election was predicated on his reputation as the man who orchestrated the defeat of Adolf Hitler’s armies and voters’ conviction in 1952 that it was time for a change.   The American public was increasingly impatient with a drumbeat of petty corruption cases involving Truman administration officials, with rising inflation, and a seemingly endless war in Asia.   Throughout his exhausting whistlestop campaign in Fall 1952, Eisenhower hammered home three key themes: communism, corruption, and Korea, as central to his crusade.  The slogan, C2, K1, became a Republican anthem.  Democrats’ response that Americans never had it so good did not resonate as well with voters.   Eisenhower took 55% of the popular vote and earned a decisive 442-89 victory in the electoral college.</p>
			<p>Because he had promised in a late campaign speech in Detroit to “go to Korea” and determine the best course of action there, Eisenhower followed through in December.  He quickly concluded, based on an on the ground assessment, that there was no easy path to victory.  Eisenhower needed to find a way to achieve peace with honor—ending the war without sacrificing a foot of South Korea territory to the communists.</p>
			<p>En route home, he spent a week on board the cruiser USS Helena bound for Hawaii, accompanied by Charles Wilson and Herbert Brownell, his designees for Secretary of Defense and Attorney General, respectively.  At Wake Island, they were joined by Ike’s choices for Secretary of State, Treasury, and Budget Director, along with his longtime confidant, General Lucius Clay.  The purpose was to enable his key advisers to get to know one another and chart a course for the new administration.</p>
			<p>Once home at Morningside Heights on the Columbia University campus in New York City, after a Christmas holiday break, Eisenhower began writing his inaugural address, working first with C.D. Jackson and later with Emmet John Hughes, both of whom were on loan to him from Time/Life.  Ike shared a draft of the address at a pre-inauguration meeting with his cabinet at New York’s Commodore Hotel on January 12, 1953, eliciting vigorous applause. As one of his biographers has noted, “he wanted neither to lecture nor to preach as he tried to articulate the grounding principles of his administration.”  Despite the positive response from his top aides, Ike was not satisfied that he had struck the right notes.  As recounted by Hughes, on January 17 Ike began working on an entirely new version of his address. According to Hughes, Eisenhower “felt a restless anxiety never displayed, before or later, about any speech.”  But the new draft did not jell.  The president-elect then decided, with Hughes’ help, to rework the version he had delivered to the cabinet.  He continued to do so right up to the 20th, removing references to Moscow after UN Ambassador-designate Henry Cabot Lodge commented about problems with the phrasing.</p>
			<p>Inauguration day in Washington dawned cool and overcast, though the sun peeked through the clouds during the ceremony.   Ike and Mamie attended a special service in the morning at the National Presbyterian Church.  He was not yet a member, but would join the church within months of taking up residency in the White House.   After changing into his inauguration dress, which included striped trousers and dark gray formal jacket as well as a precedent-breaking homburg in place of the traditional silk top hat, Ike was driven to the White House.  There he engaged in a brief, frosty interaction with President Harry Truman, declining Truman’s offer of hospitality before they took a limousine ride, as per tradition, to the Capitol.   The harsh campaign rhetoric each had directed at the other still stung, and contributed to the frost.  Their conversation during the short ride was mundane, focused on the crowd, the weather, and the importance of an orderly transition.  Ike asked Truman who had ordered his son John home from Korea for the inaugural ceremonies.  “I did,” Truman replied.  Eisenhower offered a brief thank you, and that was the extent of their exchange.  Ike reiterated his thanks in a letter to Truman three days later, expressing appreciation for “your thoughtfulness in ordering my son home from Korea . . . and even more especially for not allowing either him or me to know that you had done so.”</p>
			<p>At noon, before an impressive crowd eager to celebrate the Republicans’ return to power in Washington, Eisenhower was sworn in by Chief Justice Fred Vinson, as was his young Vice President, Richard M. Nixon.  Eisenhower used two Bibles:  a George Washington Bible and one his mother gave him when he graduated from West Point.</p>
			<p>Breaking another precedent, Eisenhower offered a brief prayer before commencing with his formal address:  “May cooperation be permitted and be the mutual aim of those who, under the concepts of our Constitution, hold to differing political faiths; so that all may work for the good of our beloved country and Thy glory. Amen.”</p>
			<p>The inaugural speech Eisenhower delivered was neither the longest nor the shortest of its kind; nor was it filled with florid expressions.    But one biographer’s dismissal of the speech as “tedious and instantly forgettable” is grossly unfair.</p>
			<p>Eisenhower’s major focus in the twenty-minute address was the future of mankind. Would it be slave or free?  Would Americans respond effectively to the challenges of their times?  Are we moving towards the light, he asked, or are “the shadows of another night closing in upon us?”</p>
			<p>Eisenhower highlighted the importance of the nation’s founding documents and the watchfulness of Divine Providence.  The struggle against atheistic communism, he observed was central to America’s future. “Freedom is pitted against slavery; lightness against the dark.”   The leaders of the free world, in this telling, needed to work together; danger lay in “discord.”</p>
			<p>Eisenhower said his administration would be guided by certain fixed principles.  He listed nine of them by number and briefly elaborated.   Key examples included abhorring war and standing firm against aggression; placing love of country above comfort and convenience; recognizing that economic health was “the indispensable basis of military strength and the free world’s peace”; support for the United Nations as a means of strengthening “special bonds the world over”; and a profound conviction that all peoples and nations were equal. No race, Eisenhower observed, is inferior or expendable.   Underscoring his commitment to this last premise, Eisenhower said he wanted America’s friends to know that he would “observe the difference between world leadership and imperialism; between firmness and truculence; between a thoughtfully calculated goal and a spasmodic reaction to the stimulus of emergencies.”  Above all, Ike insisted, his administration would defend the “deathless dignity of man.”</p>
			<p>As president, Eisenhower lived up to his commitments to prudent stewardship of American resources and an open hand of friendship offered even to the nation’s major adversary, the Soviet Union.   That his approach to waging Cold War sometimes fell short of this high standard seems indisputable.  That he kept the peace and oversaw eight years of increased material prosperity is equally indisputable.</p>
			<p>Following delivery of his address Eisenhower’s day in the spotlight was not over.  After a brief lunch, he and Mamie reviewed a parade of floats along Pennsylvania Avenue, including ten floats from his native state of Texas relating the various stages of his life, West Point cadets marching past the review stand, and even some saddled up Kansas and California cowboys.  Remarkably, Ike permitted one of the cowboys to lasso him, surely the first and last time for such an occurrence at a presidential inauguration!  The parade went on for what Eisenhower later recalled was too many hours—five, in fact, rather than the scheduled three.  “Not until nearly seven o’clock did the last two elephants go by,” Ike recalled in his memoir, <cite>Mandate for Change</cite>.  Then it was off to the White House to change clothes, and attendance at two inaugural balls where Ike offered brief comments. Around one in the morning on January 21, 1953 Dwight Eisenhower went to bed as president of the United States.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
