<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>A Vision of America: The Second Inaugural Address of George W. Bush, by Mark J. Rozell</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-120" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Vision of America<br/>
				The Second Inaugural Address of George W. Bush</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Mark J. Rozell</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>President George W. Bush delivered his second inaugural address on January 20, 2005, after having won a meaningful reelection with a majority national popular vote and clear Electoral College majority. Bush’s first term initially stood under the cloud of his having lost the popular vote to Democrat Al Gore, and emerging barely victorious after a disputed election settled by the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Supreme Court by a one-vote margin thirty-six days after Election Day.</p>
			<p>The terrorist attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001 transformed Bush’s presidency and established the context for a second inaugural address that differed greatly from his first. Bush began his first term committed to a robust domestic policy agenda, having pledged that the United States should not embark on regime change abroad, but rather focus on challenges at home.</p>
			<p>After the terrorist attacks, the president pivoted from a domestic policy focus to protecting the homeland and combatting forces of terrorism abroad. The United States thus embarked on military actions and eventual occupations in Afghanistan and Iraq, with strong bipartisan support in Congress and the national generally. As the Middle East wars dragged on long beyond public expectations and American casualties grew, support for the president’s actions abroad declined and thus he entered the 2004 election cycle in a difficult political position.</p>
			<p>Bush’s victory in 2004 over Democratic Senator John Kerry gave the president the opportunity to define his legacy—a task he would begin to take up in his second inaugural address and second-term policy agenda. The president’s address projected a bold vision of the United States’s worldwide leadership in promoting human freedom and liberty. It was a speech that harkened back to the ideals of Woodrow Wilson and John F. Kennedy.</p>
			<p>Bush opened by establishing the historic context of the times—that the United States had fought a long Cold War for freedom, and once victorious “came years of relative quiet, years of repose, years of sabbatical—and then there came a day of fire”, referring to 9/11. The president then notes that this country that stood tall and victorious after the collapse of communism had now “seen our vulnerability”. He attributed that vulnerability to an ideology of hate that posed “a mortal threat”. He proclaimed that only “the force of human freedom” around the world could break this threat. Here the president made his call for the United States to lead the worldwide quest for human freedom and liberty, as a necessary means to protect this country: “The survival of liberty in our land increasingly depend on the success of liberty in other lands. The best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world”. Whereas John F. Kennedy had called upon the nation to defend freedom around the world wherever it was under threat, Bush here calls for the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> to both protect and expand freedom throughout the world.</p>
			<p>In making this call for the expansion of freedom around the globe, the president is at once providing a defense of his administration’s military actions in the Middle East, and calling on the United States to embark on an even larger role of international leadership in defense of freedom. Bush then ties this bold internationalist vision to the foundational beliefs of our Republic, that all people have inalienable rights best protected by a system of self-government. Advancing the ideals of our Founding Fathers the president extolled, “is the urgent requirement of our nation’s security, and the calling of our time”.</p>
			<p>The president then issues his boldest proclamation: “The survival of liberty in our land increasingly depends on the success of liberty in other lands. The best hope for peace in our world is the expansion of freedom in all the world”.</p>
			<p>The president’s soaring rhetoric of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>’s obligation to protect its homeland by promoting liberty abroad recalled his oft-stated controversial claim during his first term that preventing terrorism at home required fighting the terrorists abroad. It was clear at the time of the second inauguration that the United States’s efforts to advance liberty and democratic institutions abroad through military interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq had been a failure, and the costs of the Middle East wars were piling up with no apparent end in sight. What had begun from a conviction that military interventions would topple oppression regimes and democratic institutions would then emerge throughout the region had instead turned into a long-term military engagement seen by many of the peoples of the Middle East as a hostile occupation.</p>
			<p>The second inaugural address thus can be seen in part as Bush’s legacy having largely hinged on his administration’s policies of military intervention abroad, and these needed a rationale. Bush drew on American ideals out of its founding and also its past role in fighting tyranny abroad to preserve those ideals and bring freedoms to others. Critics of the president at the time noted that the threat of terrorism was not analogous to the great twentieth century threats to the United States and required a very different twenty-first century strategy. No one questioned the president’s assertions of the rightness of the cause of freedom from oppression, so well expressed in his second inaugural address, but whether the foreign policies of the United States during his administration were conducive to advancing freedoms abroad.</p>
			<p>Bush’s second inaugural address had little to say of the domestic policy challenges of his second term. With such a grand vision for the nation’s role in the world framing the first and most substantial portion of the address, his modest goals for America at home stand out in striking contrast. Briefly the president mentions several issues that later he would put forth in his annual State of the Union Address—home ownership, retirement savings, and health insurance reforms. These stand in this speech as mere foreshadowing of a second term domestic agenda.</p>
			<p>Finally, the president spoke of advancing freedom depending on the “private character” of the people—“on integrity, and tolerance toward others, and the rule of conscience in our own lives”. He notes that the foundations of character are families, community, and faith. These values are at the core of a highly decentralized governing system that relies on citizen virtue and strong communities. He notes that the country has its divisions, “by party and background”, but are united by “the cause of freedom”.</p>
			<p>The common thread of the speech was the president’s call to the nation to advance freedom in the world as the aspiration of all humanity, at a time during which many do not live free. He does not present in his inaugural address any specific policies to advance freedom internationally. Like many inaugural addresses, this one is large on articulating a broad vision, but very short on specifics.</p>
			<p>At this writing in late 2020, President Bush’s vision of a nation united in purpose significantly stands in contrast to the contemporary image of the United States as an intensely polarized nation unable to agree on much at all. At a time when many of the nation’s leaders have advanced politically by stoking divisions in the nation, Bush’s call to a common national purpose may seem a hopeless aspiration now. It was a noble quest, presented at a time when the country already was in the throes of partisan division, that would only intensify during the presidencies of Barack Obama and Donald J. Trump. President Bush could not then heal the nation of its divisions, but he set forth the words that addressed a fundamental challenge of our times.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
