<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Cool Cal: The Inaugural Address of Calvin Coolidge: by Amity Shlaes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-78" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Cool Cal: The Inaugural Address of Calvin Coolidge</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Amity Shlaes</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>How a citizen becomes president can tell us much about the presidency that follows. In the case of Calvin Coolidge, that “becoming” was unusual. Coolidge didn’t win an election to become president. He became president rather because of a tragic event: the death of President Warren Harding in August, 1923. Coolidge, then vice-president, happened to be vacationing in the hilly village where he was born, Plymouth Notch, Vermont. His father John woke him in the middle of the night to tell him the awful news. His father, a notary, was the only legal authority present at the moment. Yet, everyone in the small house understood the importance of a quick swearing-in. Each minute they delayed was a minute that the United States went without a president. Coolidge dressed and said a prayer. He consulted by telephone with Washington on what he might do. There was no time to dress up in tuxes, or gowns. At 2:47 a.m. Coolidge’s father swore the president into office before the family bible under a kerosene light. Only a few people witnessed the events of that historic night: Mrs. Coolidge, a local congressman, and a newspaper man.</p>
			<p>The next day the Coolidges boarded the train in Rutland and traveled south to Washington so that Coolidge might take the greatest office in the land. Coolidge gave no real speech. Out of respect for the law—but not conceding that the inauguration of Plymouth was invalid—Coolidge was sworn in once again in Washington. But the Homestead Inauguration of America’s thirtieth president was so special that to this day each August the Coolidge Foundation and the State of Vermont gather a small crowd to reenact it at Plymouth Notch. Coolidge descendants often play the roles of the new president or Mrs. Coolidge.</p>
			<p>In 1924, Coolidge won election in his own right—and with a powerful mandate. He delivered his first and only presidential inaugural address at the usual March ceremony. The themes he emphasized in that address were the very same the astute observer could have picked up at that initial, improvised inauguration in Plymouth.</p>
			<p>The first of these themes is the importance of the divisions of government—not only the three branches in Washington but also the division of government between Washington and the states. Coolidge understood that the tension between the centralized and the local was, as he put it, evidence of “matchless wisdom that is enshrined in our Constitution.” Just as on that night in Plymouth, America must always balance the needs of the nation with respect for the local authority, even if that authority is a mere notary. America’s constitutional structures, Coolidge said in 1925, “need constant effort and tireless vigilance for their protection and support.” National government, as he liked to refer to it, became tyranny if it did not “faithfully observe the rights of persons. Under our institutions their rights are supreme.” Those rights include the right to hold property. But individuals also had duties. Coolidge also recalled: “all owners of property are charged with a service.”</p>
			<p>In his Washington inaugural, Coolidge also emphasized another preoccupation of that Plymouth night: “obedience to the law.” Coolidge elaborated: “those who want their rights respected under the Constitution and the law ought to set the example themselves of observing the Constitution and the law.” Further, Coolidge added that “those who disregard the rules of society are not exhibiting a superior intelligence, are not promoting freedom and independence, are not following the path of civilization…”</p>
			<p>What must the American government do to respect its citizens? Coolidge laid that out in his inaugural of 1925 as well. For Coolidge, that respect was best shown when government restrains itself and leaves Americans to lead their own lives. Toleration was a key principle. Though we all may feel differently on important issues, “the fundamental precept of liberty is toleration.” Free speech and free thought are important for “the mind of America must be forever free.”</p>
			<p>The best way for the government to do that, Coolidge said, was to practice “economy in public expenditure with reduction and reform of taxation.” Tax policy sounded mundane, Coolidge said, but it was not. The government should collect only enough revenue to meet “public necessity.” Federal spending amounting to more than that was “legalized larceny.” The president elaborated: “I favor the policy of economy, not because I wish to save money, but because I wish to save people. The men and women of this country who toil are the ones who bear the cost of Government.”</p>
			<p>A final theme of Coolidge’s inaugural address was religious faith. The American empire he said, was not one of “blood and force.” America’s strength, the president said, was to lead by example. “The higher state to which she seeks the allegiance of all mankind is not of human, but of divine origin.”</p>
			<p>What to make of Coolidge’s words, at once so familiar and so strange in our current context? At a time when our nation seems so very imperfect, and differences almost insurmountable, Coolidge can offer consolation. America has lofty principles, but it can be imperfect, just as the makeshift inauguration of 1923 was imperfect. “The encouraging feature of our country,” Coolidge said in 1925, “is not that it has reached its destination,”—it hadn’t then, just as it has not now. Rather what mattered was that “it has overwhelmingly expressed its determination to proceed in the right direction.” Let us express such determination today.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
