<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Calm Before the Storm</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Harry L. Watson</h3>
			<p>Short, vague, and almost inaudible, Andrew Jackson’s First Inaugural Address belied the general’s stormy personality and the tumultuous path that took him to the White House in 1829. Humbly born and mostly self-taught, Jackson came to the presidency with a victorious military record but limited experience in civilian government and a vivid reputation for flouting established laws, procedures, and authorities. His winning presidential campaign had stirred an uproar of lies, distortions, and bitter recriminations, and his administration followed an equally stormy path that featured discharges of experienced civil servants, forced removal of American Indians, a threatened civil war with South Carolina, doom for a national transportation policy, a “Bank War” that destroyed the nation’s largest financial institution, and a revival of cutthroat political partisanship. Nevertheless, Jackson betrayed few signs of these developments when he addressed the nation on March 4, 1829.</p>
			<p>A Tennessee lawyer, planter, and frontier land speculator, Jackson became major general of the state militia and won national renown when his forces overwhelmed the British and the Creek Indians in the War of 1812. Postwar clashes with the federal judiciary and civilian Army leadership did nothing to dampen his reputation for decisive, winning action, and paved the way for his first presidential run in 1824. In that contest, Jackson won the most votes against a field of prominent but unexciting figures from James Monroe’s incumbent administration, but he still lacked the required majority. For the second time in the young republic’s history, the House of Representatives had to choose a winner from the finalists.</p>
			<p>Their choice had been John Quincy Adams, the second-place finisher and son of former president John Adams. Burdened by a chilly, distant personality, the younger Adams was a Harvard graduate and a former member of its faculty. He had grown up in foreign courts where his father served as a US diplomat, and ran on his distinguished record as the incumbent Secretary of State. By contrast, established leaders scorned Jackson as a mere “military chieftain” with dictatorial potential but no polish, education, or civilian accomplishments. When Adams, the brilliant but privileged insider, seemed to pay for his victory by naming House Speaker Henry Clay as the next Secretary of State, with an inside track to follow him as president, Washington exploded with charges of corruption. Incensed Jackson supporters denounced Washington schemers for violating “the will of the people” and vowed to vindicate democracy with a Jackson-Adams rematch four years later.</p>
			<p>In keeping with Jackson’s rough-hewn image, Adams’ elitism, and widespread resentment of the last election’s outcome, Jackson’s 1828 campaign embodied a populist spirit that glorified the ascendancy of ordinary white male Americans over the eighteenth-century Framers. Sadly, however, the campaign also revealed democracy’s ugly side, with scurrilous demagogy on both sides and few policy debates. This time, Jackson reaped the benefits of calculated chaos, routed Adams, and drew massive crowds to Washington to celebrate his triumph. As he faced the throng who gathered to witness his oath-taking before the Capitol’s East Portico, however, Jackson seems to have understood that calm reassurance might yield political benefits, and sought to quiet fears that a frontier strongman might wreck the republic. Behind his bland platitudes, however, signs lurked of coming controversies.</p>
			<p>Jackson began by thanking the American people for their trust, pledging his fidelity to their welfare, and offering to explain his guiding principles. First came a promise to respect the Constitution’s limits and the rights of the states. It was a loaded pledge. John Quincy Adams had come to grief by calling for a vast program of federally funded “internal improvements,” or roads, canals, and other expensive public works that defied public opinion and current interpretations of the Constitution. “Were we to slumber in indolence,” he had asked, “or fold up our arms and proclaim to the world that we are palsied by the will of our constituents, would it not be to cast away the bounties of Providence and doom ourselves to perpetual inferiority?” In a single sentence, Adams thus tied a radical expansion of federal powers to fiscal extravagance, intellectual snobbery, disregard of the Constitution, and contempt for the democratic process. Rejoicing at the New Englander’s blunder, Jacksonians gleefully swatted down his dreams and denounced them as extravagant and unconstitutional. Southern congressmen felt these concerns more than most. As recently as 1819 and 1820. Congress had nearly exploded over a proposal to ban slavery from the new state of Missouri, so any move to expand federal powers worried nervous slaveholders. Determined to preserve the brutal system of racial exploitation, one warned frankly, “if Congress can make canals, they can with more propriety emancipate.”</p>
			<p>Like other southern leaders, Andrew Jackson was a very large slaveholder himself, and would never tolerate attacks on the system. A promise to respect both the opportunities and limitations of executive power thus became the first substantive promise in his inaugural address, followed by support for states’ rights. There was no hint that Jackson would eventually call himself “the sole representative of the American people,” claiming a right to override Congress and confirming his enemies’ worst fears of his dictatorial impulses.</p>
			<p>The new president turned next to fiscal matters. Hoping to extinguish the national debt, he pledged “a strict and faithful economy” in public spending and then turned to the tricky subject of taxation. Ever since its creation, the federal government had depended on tariffs or import taxes as a major source of revenue. In addition, northern states increasingly demanded high tariffs to give their nascent industries a price advantage over foreign competitors. Southerners vehemently opposed such plans, convinced that tariffs would only aid manufacturers at their expense since slavery supposedly prevented an industrial South. Eventually, South Carolina decided that using tariffs to favor one economic sector over another was unconstitutional and attempted to block the policy by “nullifying” or cancelling the federal tariff within its borders. In 1832⁠&ndash;33, an infuriated Andrew Jackson would quash this violation of majority rule and his own authority, but he gave no warning at his inauguration. There he only favored protection for military suppliers and vowed to settle all other tariff disagreements through compromise. Jackson took a similar approach to internal improvements, President Adams’ signature issue. He would later brand federal funding for most transportation projects as unconstitutional, but his inaugural address ducked this question and only acknowledged the “high importance” of internal improvements and education, <em>if</em> pursued by constitutional means.</p>
			<p>As president, two of Jackson’s most controversial policies were his stances on presidential appointments and on Native Americans, but here too, he revealed little about these plans. Prefiguring modern attacks on the “deep state” and the Washington “swamp,” Jackson had vowed an overhaul of the small federal bureaucracy, which was filled, he believed, with Adams supporters and corrupt incompetents. His address pledged unspecified reforms, which took the form of mass dismissals of suspected Adams supporters. Though Jackson promised replacements with “diligence and talents,” he demanded their unshakeable loyalty as well. The President called this policy “rotation in office” and saw it as a democratic improvement over long-term appointments. Ever since, others have condemned it as the “spoils system.” Despite Jacksonian protests over alleged corruption by Adams and Clay, rewarding party activists with public office and using their help at reelection time became a fixture of nineteenth century politics.</p>
			<p>Regarding Indians, Jackson and his frontier supporters passionately coveted the fertile lands still occupied by Native peoples east of the Mississippi. At the time of his inauguration, the president was already planning to seize these territories and force the tribes westward, but he also kept these intentions quiet and only promised a “just and liberal” Indian policy. Jackson told himself that separation would benefit whites and Indians alike, but the death toll on the “Trail of Tears” would tell otherwise. Jackson also said nothing about his plans for the Bank of the United States, the nation’s largest financial institution, but his later campaign to destroy it became the biggest controversy of his administration.</p>
			<p>The new president concluded predictably by invoking God’s blessing and the example of his predecessors. His inaugural address had hinted at disputes that lay ahead without revealing his intentions. In time, however, Andrew Jackson’s policies became so controversial that his enemies formed an opposition political party to resist him, calling themselves the Whigs. Organized in the Democratic Party, the President’s supporters fought them relentlessly to the eve of the Civil War, and American politics has featured two-party competition ever since. It became the most enduring legacy of Andrew Jackson’s soothing inaugural address.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
