<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 64</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-64" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of William McKinley</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Christopher Capozzola</h3>
			<p>William McKinley stepped to the podium on the east front of the U.S. Capitol building in Washington, unfolded his handwritten speech, and addressed the crowd of 40,000 who had gathered that sunny March afternoon to watch the 54-year-old Civil War veteran take the presidential oath of office. McKinley spoke during the depths of the worst economic downturn America had experienced in its history: four decades later people would talk about the “Great Depression” to distinguish it from the one that followed the Panic of 1893. The last inaugural address of the nineteenth century looked backward, promising Americans the restoration of a better past. But as Thomas Edison’s newly invented “kinetoscope” recorded the inauguration&mdash;the first ever captured on film&mdash;the day’s events signaled the impending arrival of a modern, industrial, outward-looking, media-drenched age: the twentieth century.</p>
			<p>William McKinley knew how to win an election. By 1896, he was an experienced former member of Congress, a popular governor of Ohio, and a natural at the glad-handing style and smoke-filled rooms of Republican Party politics. Born in 1843, McKinley saw combat during the Civil War (long after he retired his uniform, people still called him “The Major”) and built a successful legal career in Canton, Ohio, where he married Ida Saxton, who suffered medical problems throughout her husband’s career. In 1876, the young lawyer won election to the U.S. House of Representatives and served 14 years in Washington before taking the governor’s seat in Columbus in 1892.</p>
			<p>Both Republicans and Democrats considered McKinley just a little more moderate than the rest of the GOP. They were right to think so. As a rookie congressman, he had voted for a compromise currency policy known as “bimetallism,” which would protect the gold standard that bankers loved while allowing for a modest increase in the quantity of silver-backed currency, a move that could help working families make ends meet. The Major also pushed through the McKinley Tariff of 1890, which raised tariffs on imports (helping American business) and permitted the negotiation of reciprocal trade deals to sell American factory goods abroad (aiding workers). McKinley trod a middle paths in cultural conflicts as well. As Ohio’s governor, McKinley had taken a modest stand against the nativist American Protective Association and the tide of anti-immigrant politics that swept the nation during the Panic of 1893.</p>
			<p>After cruising to victory in the Republican nomination contest, McKinley faced a formidable opponent in William Jennings Bryan, a former Nebraska congressman. “The Great Commoner” electrified the Democratic convention in Chicago on July 9, 1896, with a speech that rallied delegates to a platform of free silver, intoning that “you shall not crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.” Bryan raised the stakes of the election, and in the midst of a national depression, put economic policy on the ballot.</p>
			<p>By all accounts, Bryan had the upper hand on the campaign trail. A political outsider, he had youth, energy, oratorical skills, and a bold financial platform. And, thanks to Jim Crow laws and election day violence that had been steadily disfranchising African American voters in the South, the Democrats had a near-lock on the 112 electoral votes of the former Confederacy. But McKinley had an appealingly moderate image, strong support in the northeast and the cities, and knew the American people were tired of the Democratic Party that had given them eight (non-consecutive) years of President Grover Cleveland&mdash;a man who did little to relieve the depression and made no effort to appeal to ordinary voters. McKinley sat on a huge campaign war chest (despite McKinley’s slogan of “the people against the bosses,” wealthy industrialists were fully on his side), and had a shrewd campaign manager, Mark Hanna, to steward it.</p>
			<p>While Bryan took to the rails for a grueling whistle-stop campaign, McKinley ran a quiet “front porch” effort that invited thousands of onlookers to his home in Canton, Ohio. (The maneuver also spared Ida McKinley the exhaustion that travel would have required.) On the issues, McKinley promised to bury the hatchet of the Civil War, hoping that sectional unity could pick off one or two states from the Solid South. Sensing the public’s hesitation about Bryan’s free silver crusade, and under pressure from party bosses, McKinley veered toward a more conservative embrace of the gold standard. His running mate, New Jersey Governor Garret Hobart, brought an eastern, industrial, big money balance to the ticket. At a time of social upheaval and economic crisis, McKinley was the electorate’s safe choice, and he won an easy victory of 271 electoral votes to 176 for Bryan.</p>
			<p>Four months later, McKinley arrived in Washington. On the night before the inauguration, in a mood that he recalled as one of “settled sadness and sincerity,” McKinley dined with the outgoing president, Grover Cleveland, who warned his Republican successor that war loomed in Venezuela or Cuba. The next morning, dressed in an American-made woolen suit, McKinley traveled to Capitol Hill, and took the oath of office from Chief Justice Melville Fuller. Economic issues had determined the election, and the “depression in business and distress among the people” likewise dominated McKinley’s address. The new president acknowledged the crisis that had bankrupted so many (including, nearly, McKinley himself), promising to end the “prevailing business conditions entailing idleness upon willing labor and loss to useful enterprises.” No friend of organized labor, though, McKinley warned of “industrial disturbances,” or strikes, “from which speedy relief must be had.” The new president endorsed the tariff&mdash;calling it “settled policy … pursued from the beginning and practiced by all parties”&mdash;and called for Congress to meet in special session to increase tariff rates, which, in July 1897, they promptly did. Seeking to thread a moderate needle on the currency question, McKinley reiterated his call for an international conference to consider bimetallism, promising that such a commission would have “early and earnest attention” from his administration. In office, McKinley quickly abandoned that aim and fully embraced the gold standard, enshrining it in law in March 1900.</p>
			<p>Taking his oath on a Bible presented to him by the bishops of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, a reminder of the war for racial equality that was rapidly fading from living memory, McKinley embodied the contradictions of white Republicans’ thinking on race. At a time when racist violence was at a national peak, McKinley asserted that “[l]ynchings must not be tolerated in a great and civilized country like the United States.” But he did not push matters too far, observing in his address that the election “demonstrated the obliteration of sectional or geographical lines.” Reaching out a hand of friendship to his former Confederate foes, while remaining largely silent on the aspirations of African Americans, McKinley proclaimed that “[t]he North and the South no longer divide on the old lines.”</p>
			<p>On other political issues of the day, McKinley promised moderation. He called for reform of business trusts&mdash;though in no particularly detailed way&mdash;and endorsed civil service reform and the care of Civil War veterans, “that most deserving body of public creditors.” He urged reform of immigration and citizenship laws but insisted that to anarchists “our gates must be promptly and tightly closed,” a policy that would have done nothing to stop the American-born anarchist Leon Czołgosz, who assassinated McKinley in 1901.</p>
			<p>In foreign affairs, the new president once again looked backward to reassure the American people. “We have cherished the policy of non-interference with affairs of foreign governments wisely inaugurated by [George] Washington.” McKinley suggested that the new administration wanted none of the headaches that had plagued his predecessor: no aim of annexing the Hawaiian Kingdom (overthrown with participation by U.S. troops in 1893); no wish for conflict with Britain over Venezuela (which had nearly brought the two nations to war in 1895); no interest in meddling in the Cuban war of independence. There was no sign of the future to come, as foreign affairs quickly displaced domestic issues during McKinley’s first term: the acquisition of Spain’s colonial empire, the brutal suppression of a nationalist independence movement in the Philippines, and the announcement of the Open Door Policy in China. Quite the opposite: “We want no wars of conquest,” McKinley insisted. “[W]e must avoid the temptation of territorial aggression.”</p>
			<p>The national press praised the “peaceful, dignified, and practical temper” of McKinley’s address, while that same day William Jennings Bryan offered the press a statement of his own political views, not-so-subtly foreshadowing his plan to challenge McKinley four years later. McKinley’s inaugural address marked the beginning of decades of Republican dominance in the White House. As Americans watched aging Civil War veterans march, as they heard farmers cry out against an urban industrial economy, as political leaders brushed away the political claims of African Americans at home or of Cubans abroad, the United States stood at the end of a passing era, with a president poised to lead them into the twentieth century. On that afternoon in Washington, Thomas Edison’s cameras were there to capture it.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
