<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Eve of War: The Second Inaugural Address of Woodrow Wilson, by John Milton Cooper</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-74" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Eve of War<br/>
				The Second Inaugural Address of Woodrow Wilson</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> John Milton Cooper</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<blockquote>For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for the battle&gt;</blockquote>
			</p>
			<p>
				<cite>First Corinthians 14:8, King James &amp; Geneva Bible</cite>
			</p>
			<p>As the son, grandson, nephew, and later son-in-law of Presbyterian ministers, Woodrow Wilson would have heard and read those words many times. As a practiced orator and scrupulous stylist, Wilson would never have spoken in that fashion. Yet that was what he did when he delivered his second inaugural address on March 5, 1917. He did that because he believed he had no choice.</p>
			<p>Wilson’s first words hinted at the kind of address he would rather have given. “The four years which have elapsed since last I stood in this place have been crowded with counsel and action of the most vital interest and consequence. Perhaps no equal period in our history has been so fruitful of important reforms in our economic and industrial life or so full of significant changes in the spirit and purpose of our political action.” At the risk of bragging, the president could fairly point to the consequential, sometimes monumental domestic legislation he and his party had enacted during those years. More than anything else, those achievements had secured his re-election, to become the first Democrat since Andrew Jackson to win a second consecutive term. But, as he immediately conceded, he could not dwell on those accomplishments because “other matters have more and more forced themselves upon our attention, matters lying outside our own life as a nation and over which we had no control.”</p>
			<p>Wilson meant foreign affairs, specifically the titanic conflict raging across the Atlantic. A few days after he was first elected in 1912, he had remarked to a friend, “It would be an irony of fate if my administration had to deal chiefly with foreign problems; for all my preparation has been in domestic matters.” Even before the outbreak of the world war in 1914, “foreign problems,” particularly the revolution in Mexico, had intruded on his time and attention. The sinking of the <i>Lusitania</i> in May 1915 by a German submarine had brought the war in Europe home to Americans, and it had required Wilson to become more of a diplomatist. It was remarkable that he was still able to accomplish as much as he did at home. Even more remarkably, through a combination of patient and daring diplomacy and luck, he got the Germans to rein in their submarines, thereby lifting the threat of being drawn into the war. The president and his party did play the peace card in the 1916 election, with the slogan “He Kept Us Out of War,” but by the time the campaign got under way that appeal referred more to Mexico than to Europe.</p>
			<p>This happy state of affairs came to an abrupt end only a month before the inauguration when the Germans unleashed their submarines. “We have been deeply wronged upon the seas, but we have not wished to wrong or injure in return; have retained throughout the consciousness of standing apart, intent upon an interest that transcended the immediate issues of the war itself.”</p>
			<p>What hurt Wilson most about this German move, even more than having to set aside his domestic program, was that he had been seeking to end the war and begin to build a new international order. As soon as he knew he had won another term, he had mounted a peace offensive. First, he had dispatched a public call to the belligerents, asking them to state their aims, with a view toward mediating the conflict. Then, just over a week over the Germans’ submarine move, he had gone before the Senate to unveil his vision of a non-punitive, brokered peace, which he called “peace without victory,” to be guaranteed by a league of nations with enforcement powers, which the United States would join. This was Wilson’s fondest wish, to become peacemaker-in-chief to the world.</p>
			<p>Now, the Germans had blasted that hope. Arming American merchant ships was his present policy. Yet, he conceded, “We may even be drawn on, by circumstances, not by our purpose or desire, to a more active assertion of our rights as we see them and a more immediate association with the great struggle itself.” Whether or not that came to pass, there was no way to evade involvement with what was happening on and across the seas. “We are provincials no longer. The tragical events of the thirty months of vital turmoil through which we have just passed have made us citizens of the world. There can be no turning back. Our own fortunes as a nation are involved whether we would have it so or not.”</p>
			<p>Wilson insisted that America must remain true to the vision he had so recently laid out of a just and lasting peace. He elaborated on a set of propositions he had sketched in his “peace without victory” address: equality of nations, great and small; an end to the balance of power; governments based on consent of the governed; freedom of the seas; limitation of armaments; mutual non-interference in internal affairs. Less than a year later, Wilson would reiterate these ideas and tie them to specific territorial matters in his Fourteen Points. But that would come only when he spoke as the leader of a belligerent nation, who was arrogating to himself the leadership of an armed coalition.</p>
			<p>Despite his previous warning in the inaugural address, Wilson did not propose to go down the road to war yet. “I pray to God I may be given the wisdom and prudence to do my duty in the true spirit of this great people.⁠ ⁠… The shadows that lie dark upon our path will soon be dispelled and we shall walk with the light all about us if we can be but true to ourselves⁠—to ourselves as we have wished to be known in the counsels of the world and in the thought of all those who love liberty and justice and the right exalted.” Noble ideals and soaring rhetoric—qualities for which Wilson was already renowned and would become still more famous—but there was no escaping the uncertain sound from the trumpet he was sounding in this inaugural address.</p>
			<p>The sound was uncertain because his mind was likewise uncertain. Wilson would spend another month watching events unfold, reassessing the practicality of armed neutrality, questioning how he could best pursue the kind of peace and world order he envisioned—done mostly in solitary, thoughtful, prayerful, agonizing reflection—before he decided what to do next. Ultimately, he would choose war, and he would do it in the spirit he had shown in this address. In his eloquent speech to Congress on April 2, 1917, Wilson would point again to the propositions he had laid down in the inaugural address, and he would proclaim, “The world must be made safe for democracy.” That sentence would often be misquoted because many wanted to see Wilson’s decision as a clarion call to a crusade. The note he sounded was not a resounding blare; it was a careful, sometimes muted call to fight for something beyond military victory. It was a call to take up the task of building a more just and peaceful world. His trumpet’s sound would have mixed notes, but it would no longer be uncertain.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
