<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 40</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of James Buchanan</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Jean H. Baker</h3>
			<p>Promptly at noon on the pleasant sunny day of March 4, 1857, James Buchanan, soon to take the oath of office as the 15th president of the United States, began his inaugural address to a distinguished audience of congressmen, judges, diplomats and residents of the District of Columbia. At sixty-five he was older than any of his predecessors and his snow-white hair, stooped shoulders and reedy voice suggested as much. Few actually heard what Buchanan had to say in an address of nearly 3,000 words; rather it would reach Americans in its printed version published in the nation’s newspapers. Buchanan was not feeling well. Since his arrival in Washington he had been suffering from the dysentery associated with the National Hotel where he was staying before moving into the White House. Still, the moment was a time of personal affirmation. After a long career in public service he had reached the pinnacle of his ambitions.</p>
			<p>Born in Franklin County, Pennsylvania in 1791, Buchanan had begun his career in the Pennsylvania state legislature. He had served five terms in the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Congress from 1821⁠&ndash;1831. In 1834 he had been elected to the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Senate where he served two terms. In addition, he had foreign policy experience, having served as <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> minister to Russia and more recently, to the Court of <abbr>St.</abbr> James in Great Britain. And he had served in James Polk’s cabinet as secretary of state. There was no one in the United States who could boast of such a distinguished public career.</p>
			<p>A loyal Democrat, Buchanan was popular in the South for his positions against the Republicans, the newly formed party whom he considered agitators. He had often taken the side of the South on issues relating to slavery. In historical terms he represented a doughface, that is, a northern man who supported southern interests especially as they related to slavery. Some Americans called him “Old Public Functionary,” but his service gave him confidence that he could solve the existential threat to the United States of what to do about slavery in the territories.</p>
			<p>Buchanan began his address with what became staples for American inaugural addresses. He repeated the presidential oath of office; he invoked the God’s help and a fervent exponent of American exceptionalism, he proclaimed the United States the nation with the greatest “capacity of man for self-government.” In an unusual aside he promised he would not run again, though no one expected him to.</p>
			<p>After these platitudes Buchanan addressed the issue of slavery in the territories west of Missouri and Iowa, an area known as Kansas and Nebraska that awaited organization. In 1854 new legislation supported by Illinois Senator Stephen Douglas upended the previous arrangement in the Missouri Compromise that banned slavery in the region. Instead the Kansas-Nebraska Act introduced the concept of popular sovereignty; the people, not Congress, should decide about slavery through their representatives in the territorial legislature.</p>
			<p>Buchanan had been in London when the controversial Kansas-Nebraska Act accelerated the process of party decay and led to the formation of the Republican party. Despite northern opposition, Buchanan now saluted the arrangement as “a happy conception,” an acknowledgment of the self-government and the will of the majority that he saw as essential aspects of American greatness. In his address he took the southern position that Congress could not prohibit slavery during the territorial phase of preparation for statehood. Only when citizens were drafting a constitution could slavery be prohibited by their votes. In any case Buchanan insisted that the Supreme Court would settle this issue and “… to their decision I shall cheerfully submit.”</p>
			<p>Buchanan referred here to the Dred Scott case which after years had reached the Supreme Court. What he did not say is that he already knew its outcome. In fact he had helped frame the decision. In an act of extraordinary impropriety as president-elect, Buchanan had put pressure on his friend, Justice Robert Grier of Pennsylvania, to join with the southern judges to embrace a broad ranging judicial decision that would end controversies over the extension of slavery into the western territories.</p>
			<p>Two days after Buchanan’s inauguration the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Supreme Court in <i>Dred Scott <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Sanford</i> ruled that Blacks had no rights of federal citizenship and that the Missouri compromise by prohibiting slavery in a part of national territory was unconstitutional. Slavery was nationalized; the newly emerging Republican party’s most important platform was overturned. Buchanan’s intervention had played a significant role in this accommodation to southern interests.</p>
			<p>From Buchanan’s point of view the decision emboldened him to believe that he would be the chief executive who put to rest “this agitation”: “May we not, then, hope that the long agitation on this subject is approaching its end, and that the geographical parties [by which he meant the Republicans] to which it has given birth⁠ ⁠… will speedily become extinct?” Having dealt with the most divisive issue of his time in four paragraphs, Buchanan moved on to other matters in the rest of his speech. But as president he soon learned that the Dred Scott decision rather than creating the sectional harmony he anticipated had only deepened the sectional divide in the nation. Kansas became a flash point, and with little sensitivity to northern positions, Buchanan’s prosouthern handling of its governance doomed his presidency.</p>
			<p>Having dispensed with the issue of slavery in the territories, Buchanan next celebrated the familiar principles of midcentury rhetoric⁠&mdash;the Constitution and Union. The nation’s economic success came from its large free trading area “conducted on railroads and canals, on noble rivers and arms of the sea which bind together the North and the South, the East and West,⁠ ⁠…” So successful was this financial union that there was a surplus in the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Treasury that the president-elect proposed could be used to pay down the public debt and shore up the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Navy as well as the nation’s seacoast defenses. Among the blessings of America, he asserted, was its vast inheritance of public lands. In an obvious slap at the rival nativist political party, the Know Nothings or American party, Buchanan saluted the contributions of “those exiles from foreign shores⁠ ⁠… who have done so much to promote the growth and prosperity of the nation” by settling on western lands.</p>
			<p>As a self-avowed strict constitutionalist Buchanan nevertheless promoted the importance of a military road across the territories to the Pacific. And he spent as much of his speech on justifying such an extension of constitutional authority as he had on the issue of slavery in the territories. In fact during his presidency he would have little time or energy to promote such a road.</p>
			<p>Finally, drawing on his experience as a minister abroad, Buchanan offered his thoughts on diplomacy. It should be “frank and direct” and conducted in a spirit of “Christian benevolence,” avoiding the entangling alliances that President Washington had warned about. In the final paragraph of his inaugural address Buchanan offered an astounding review of previous American foreign policy. Americans, he said, had never extended their control over the continent by force. Rather their territorial expansion had come through “fair purchase.” He did not consider any dispossession of the Native Americans, and as for the recent acquisitions in Mexico, they had come through purchase in a peace treaty.</p>
			<p>After this James Buchanan took the oath of office. His inaugural address had included some boiler plate concerns of the Democratic party, such as strict construction of the Constitution and support of immigration and territorial expansion. But his address also previewed a split in the party as Buchanan embraced southern interests in the matter of slavery in the territories. Expecting that the courts had solved the issue, he expected his presidency to deal with other matters. But his inaugural forecast proved incorrect as the United States drifted toward civil war, in part because as president James Buchanan failed to consider the legitimate interests of the North.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
