<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 34</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of Zachary Taylor</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Michael F. Holt</h3>
			<p>Zachary Taylor’s platitude-filled inaugural address was one of the shortest by any president in American history. His personal background largely accounts for its brevity and its patriotic paeans. But the few concrete items also reflect the campaign run for him before and after the Whig party’s national convention nominated him in June 1848 as well as the major issues that shaped that election.</p>
			<p>The first sentence of Taylor’s address suggests that he considered it a necessary but unwelcome obligation. The inaugural may well have been the first public speech he ever had to make, and he kept it short. Taylor was not a politician. He had never sought or held a civilian public office, attended a party meeting, or even voted prior to November 1848. Rather he was a career army officer who commanded the American troops in northern Mexico during the first year of the Mexican-American War. The seemingly miraculous victory of his heavily out-numbered army at Buena Vista in February 1847 injected him into the presidential race. His fame and popularity simply exploded as news of his triumph spread eastward from the Mississippi Valley to the Atlantic coast, and by May 1847 savvy politicos predicted that he was certain to be the next president.</p>
			<p>His early backers, like Taylor himself, presented him not as a Whig, but as a “No Party” or “People’s” candidate who would not be beholden to any party’s principles if elected president. This apparent contempt for traditional Whig programs and Taylor’s willingness before and even after Whigs nominated him to accept non-Whig nominations outraged established Whig leaders who vowed they would never support anyone but an identifiable Whig.</p>
			<p>Party regulars’ hostility to Taylor forced him and his most trusted advisors to compose two public letters attesting to his Whig credentials, one in April six weeks before the Whigs’ national convention and one in September, six weeks before election day. Known as the Allison letters, they accurately previewed the inaugural address he gave in March 1849. Then, too, he tried to reassure suspicious Whigs that he deserved their trust. In the first Allison letter, Taylor identified himself as “a Whig but not an ultra Whig” even while adding his intention “to act independent of party domination” if elected. Then came a muted pledge of Whig allegiance. From the start of the Mexican War under Democratic President James K. Polk, Whigs blasted it as an unconscionable act of aggression aimed at grabbing land from a weak neighbor. In the first Allison letter, therefore, Taylor condemned aggressive wars of conquest and called for magnanimity toward the defeated Mexicans. This language augured Taylor’s words about foreign policy in his inaugural. His promise to “exhaust every resort of honorable diplomacy before appealing to arms,” was a thinly concealed shaft at Polk’s actions inciting the Mexican War. This was straight Whig doctrine.</p>
			<p>Even more important, in the first and second Allison letters, just as in his inaugural address, Taylor embraced the fundamental Whig principle that it was Congress’s duty, not the President’s, to set domestic policies regarding tariffs, internal improvements, currency, and the like and that he would never veto congressional legislation unless it were clearly unconstitutional. This idea of the supremacy of Congress over the executive branch had been the founding rationale for the Whig party when it organized against Andrew Jackson in the 1830<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr></p>
			<p>Yet when Taylor said in his inaugural address that “I shall look with confidence to the enlightened patriotism of that body [Congress] to adopt such measures of conciliation as may harmonize conflicting interests and tend to perpetuate that Union which should be the paramount object of our hopes and affections,” he referred to far more than the proper relationship between the executive and legislative branches. Instead, he pointed obliquely to the sectional quarrel over slavery expansion that had dominated the election of 1848 and that remained unsettled as of March 1849. By the fall of 1847, in fact, Taylor had privately written that this escalating sectional conflict over slavery’s possible extension was the gravest threat to the Union since the adoption of the Constitution. His inaugural words about perpetuating the Union were <em>not</em> mere platitudes. To this old soldier, they were heartfelt, as his subsequent actions as president emphatically made clear.</p>
			<p>From the moment the war started in May 1846, Northerners, many of them Whigs, denounced it as a Democratic plot to seize Mexican land so that Southerners could extend slavery west of Texas. In part to refute that charge, in August 1846 a Pennsylvania Democrat introduced an amendment to a bill in the House of Representatives that would bar slavery from any land taken from Mexico as a result of the war. This so-called Wilmot Proviso passed the House, where free-state members outnumbered slave state members, on a strict sectional vote. Northerners supported it. Southerners vehemently opposed it because it denied slaveholders the right to enter national territories on an equal basis with northern non-slaveholders. The amended bill died in the Senate, and the Wilmot Proviso never passed Congress. But it continually came to a vote in subsequent sessions of Congress, always polarizing the northern and southern members of both the Whig and Democratic parties against each other. The longer it did so, the more tempers frayed. By mid-1847 northern state legislatures were instructing their United States Senators to impose the Proviso on any land taken from Mexico while growing numbers of southern state legislatures threatened to secede from the Union should the Proviso ever be enacted into law. This was the crisis that so disturbed Taylor a year before his election.</p>
			<p>To restore unity across sectional lines in 1847, both Whigs and Democrats sought alternative policies to the Proviso for dealing with the slavery extension issue. Democrats did so with a formula called popular sovereignty. This called for Congress to forego any action concerning slavery in territories and instead allow the actual settlers in them to decide whether to admit or prohibit slavery. A major proponent of this formula, Michigan Senator Lewis Cass was the Democratic presidential candidate in 1848, and in that campaign he pledged that he would veto the Proviso should it ever pass Congress. Throughout 1847, when the acquisition of Mexican territory was still hypothetical, northern and southern Whigs united behind an insistence that no territory whatsoever be seized from Mexico. Ratification of the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo and with it the huge Mexican Cession in March 1848 ended that dodge. Now Whigs had to face their party’s sectional polarization over slavery extension head on.</p>
			<p>That fact mightily influenced Taylor’s nomination even while making it more controversial. On the one hand, the loss of the antiwar, anti-expansion issues while Democrats could claim credit for almost doubling the size of the country convinced a majority of Whigs at their national convention that the party needed to run a military hero to have any chance of winning the election. On the other hand, it deepened the hostility to Taylor by Northerners who loathed the prospect of slavery’s further western extension. It was not just that Taylor gave no public support to northern Whigs’ demand that slavery be prohibited from the Mexican Cession by congressional law. A resident of Baton Rouge, Louisiana, Taylor owned over a hundred slaves who worked plantations in Louisiana and Mississippi. To most northern Whigs this fact made Taylor seem a certain loser in their states. Hence, his eventual nomination appalled them.</p>
			<p>Whigs’ selection of a large slaveholder and Democrats’ nomination of a man who pledged to veto the Proviso prompted the most fervent antislavery men in both parties to bolt to a new Free Soil party that would capture 14 percent of the North’s popular vote in 1848. Eliminating the rationale for this new party, one of the “conflicting interests” he mentioned, was thus one of the achievements Taylor hinted at in his inaugural address.</p>
			<p>In the 1848 campaign Whigs brazenly ran a two-faced campaign. In the South they promised that Taylor as a slaveholder and fellow Southerner would never allow the insulting Wilmot Proviso to become law. In the North, in contrast, Whig campaigners seized on Taylor’s pledge not to veto congressional legislation. The best way to stop slavery’s extension they avowed, much to the frustration of Free Soil campaigners, was to elect a northern Whig majority to Congress. They would pass the Proviso and Taylor, quite unlike Lewis Cass, would sign it into law.</p>
			<p>Whigs’ doubled-faced tactic worked in 1848. Taylor carried seven of fifteen northern states and eight of fifteen slave states. Free Soil incursions into both major parties’ ranks varied from state to state. They helped Whigs carry New York while giving Ohio to Cass. But the dodge worked only because Congress had as yet failed to do anything about organizing territories in the newly acquired Mexican Cession upon which Congress might impose the Proviso. Nor was Congress able to do so in the short session between Taylor’s election and his inauguration even though Whigs were now desperate to spare Taylor from having to make a decision that would give the lie to what Whig campaigners in one section or the other had promised he would do.</p>
			<p>Although Taylor had told a confidant that he would sign the Proviso should Congress ever enact it, few people knew what he intended to do when he delivered his brief inaugural address. Despite his professed confidence about Congress’s ability to find a mutually satisfactory solution for slavery extension, he and his administration quickly decided to bypass Congress altogether by avoiding any formal organization of territorial governments upon which Congress might act. Instead, they tried have California and New Mexico immediately enter the Union as states without any territorial phase whatsoever. This solution, he promised in another rare public speech, would render any need for a Free Soil party moot. However sensible it was, the plan failed. But Taylor had died on July 9, 1850 before Congress replaced it with the famous Compromise of 1850 for the Mexican Cession.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
