<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 100</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-100" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of Richard M. Nixon</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Ken Hughes</h3>
			<p>In his first inaugural address, Richard Milhous Nixon wrote his own epitaph: “The greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker.” Twenty-five years later he would have these words carved on his tombstone.</p>
			<p>When he uttered them on Inauguration Day 1969, the words were a political promise and a personal aspiration. Nixon won and assumed office during the bloodiest years of America’s Vietnam War. A majority of Americans by then had concluded that the war was a mistake. As a motorcade took him from the White House to the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Capitol, President-elect Nixon saw something his Cold War predecessors had not: protestors lining the streets. In the 1968 campaign, Nixon had promised to “end the war and win the peace,” a goal short of victory, but one that seemed more realistic. It would be, he promised, “peace with honor,” not “peace with surrender.” All of America would be watching and judging whether he kept this promise.</p>
			<p>When Nixon aspired to the honor of “peacemaker,” however, he was talking about more than Vietnam. He hoped to change the terms of the entire Cold War, to see out the era of confrontation and usher in an era of negotiation.</p>
			<p>In part this was a matter of necessity. When he left office as Vice President on January 20, 1961, America’s numerical advantage in nuclear weapons over the Soviet Union was at least 20-to-1. Eight years later, the two nations doomsday arsenals were roughly equal. President Nixon would not approach the Cold War as his predecessors had, because he no longer could.</p>
			<p>Practical necessity was not Nixon’s only motive for changing course. He also possessed a particularly Nixonian vision of peace. Like his unexpected Democratic hero, President Woodrow Wilson, Nixon hoped to create an international framework to work out international differences without war. Wilson sought to create this framework idealistically, through open agreements openly negotiated. Nixon would try to get similar results through secret negotiations and backchannel deals. He thought he could play the Communist powers off one another, exploit the growing rift between the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China, use the prospect of improved relations with China against Russia, with Russia against China, and with both against North Vietnam. In three years he would look like a smashing success, in 25 years like an elder statesman, and in 50 years like an exposed fraud.</p>
			<p>On Inauguration Day 1969, he looked like he was copying the most popular inaugural address of the Cold War, the one delivered by John F. Kennedy eight years earlier. Garry Wills identified numerous Nixonian echoes of the New Frontier. “Let this message be heard by strong and weak alike.” (Kennedy: “Let the word go forth to friend and foe alike.”) “Those who would be our adversaries, we invite to a peaceful competition&mdash;not in conquering territory or extending dominion, but in enriching the life of man.” (Kennedy: “To those nations who would make themselves our adversary, we offer not a pledge but a request: that both sides begin anew the quest for peace.”) “To all those who would be tempted by weakness, let us leave no doubt that we will be as strong as we need to be for as long as we need to be.” (Kennedy: “We dare not tempt them with weakness. For only when our arms are sufficient beyond doubt can we be certain beyond doubt that they will never be employed.”) Comparison of the imitation to the original recalls Mark Twain’s observation that the difference between the right word and the almost-right word is the difference between lightning and lightning-bug.</p>
			<p>Not that it mattered much in the long run. By 1972, Nixon appeared to have delivered on his promises and more. He had inaugurated an era of <em>rapprochement</em> with Communist China and <em>détente</em> with the Soviet Union. In that year he became the first president to visit the capitals of either of these Communist powers. He had negotiated a nuclear arms control agreement with the Soviets. And, by playing Moscow and Beijing off one another, he got both to pressure Hanoi to accept his Vietnam settlement terms. The agreement, he declared, was “peace with honor.” In 1972, Nixon at least appeared to have some legitimate claim to history’s greatest honor.</p>
			<p>Until the end of his life, he fought successfully to keep the public from hearing most of his secretly recorded White House tapes and reading most of the records of his negotiations with Communist leaders. This secrecy proved to be essential to preserving his image as a peacemaker. When his struggle to conceal his record ended with his death in 1994, the government began the long, slow process of declassifying the tapes and documents. In the following decades, these records revealed that Nixon had forged a “decent interval” deal with the Communists. He had secretly assured Moscow and Beijing that North Vietnam could take over the South without fear of American intervention, just as long as the North waited a year or two after Nixon withdrew the last American troops. The deal he called “peace with honor” was no peace at all. It was designed to postpone, not prevent, the collapse of South Vietnam.</p>
			<p>That was not the worst of it. Declassified tapes and documents reveal that Nixon realized early on that South Vietnam could not survive without American troops. This meant that “peace with honor” was never achievable. America could either leave and lose the war or stay and fight it indefinitely. Neither alternative was peace.</p>
			<p>But Nixon never admitted in public that he couldn’t deliver what he had promised. To conceal this failure, he kept the war going through all four years of his first term. That was the only way to keep South Vietnam from falling before Election Day 1972, a defeat that would have destroyed his chances at a second term. The price of his reelection was the death of 20,000 Americans and many thousands more Vietnamese, North and South.</p>
			<p>In his first inaugural, Nixon laid out the terms by which history would judge his presidency. The test of his presidency would be whether he earned the title of peacemaker. In some ways, he did. Détente and rapprochement eased international tensions and improved relations with China and Russia. Those achievements were real, although we now see that they were tainted by Nixon’s secret assurances to both Communist powers that he would accept defeat in Vietnam, as long as they delayed it long enough for him to duck responsibility. History has yet to devise a title to bestow on leaders who prolong wars to avoid losing elections, who fraudulently package delayed defeat as peace, who sacrifice human lives for political gain.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
