<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>“Errors of judgement, not of intent”: The Second Inaugural Address of Ulysses S. Grant: by John Marszalek</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-50" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">“Errors of judgement, not of intent”: The Second Inaugural Address of Ulysses S. Grant</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> John Marszalek</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Ulysses S. Grant was both the commanding general of the Union Army (1861-1865) and president of the United States (1869-1877). Since President Abraham Lincoln was assassinated in 1865, and his successor, Andrew Johnson, the vice president, was impeached in 1868, U.S. Grant became the nation’s most famous politician. From the time of Andrew Jackson (1829-1837) to the presidency of Woodrow Wilson (1913-1921), U.S. Grant was the only president for nearly a century to serve two full terms.</p>
			<p>Grant was easily elected in 1868 and then re-elected in 1872. In the 1868 election, the Republicans met in Chicago and easily nominated Grant as their standard-bearer, with South Bend, Indiana’s Schuyler Colfax, his running mate. Grant won 26 of 34 states with an electoral victory of 214-80. His popular vote victory was only slightly more than 306,000 out of 5,715,000. It was the newly enfranchised blacks who elected him with a vote of over 500,000 in his favor.</p>
			<p>In the election of 1872, the Republicans met in Philadelphia and chose their ticket of Grant for president and Henry Wilson of Massachusetts for vice president. This time Grant won 286-66 electoral votes over Democrat Horace Greeley. A number of third parties siphoned off just a few votes. In this election, too, Grant won by 763,000 popular votes. Ironically Greeley died on November 29, 1868, and vice-presidential candidate Wilson died in 1875. Therefore, Grant served most of his second term without a vice president.</p>
			<p>When Grant ran and took office in 1869, he inherited many problems: Reconstruction, Greenbacks, Black Friday (or the attempt to corner the gold market), the Ku Klux Klan, Civil Service Reform, the New York City Tweed Ring, the Liberal Republican Movement, the issue of Santa Domingo, and the Credit Mobilier (with vice president Schuyler Colfax involved). Despite these first term difficulties, Grant ran again and won once more in 1873. This time he faced the “Crime of 1873” or the Coinage Act, making gold, not silver, the monetary standard; the “Salary Grab” or doubling the president’s salary (which was repealed in January 1874); the Panic of 1873; the Whiskey Ring; the impeachment of Secretary of War William Belknap; the disputed Hayes-Tilden presidential election of 1877; Custer’s Last Stand; and a variety of Indian problems.</p>
			<p>Grant thus had to deal with numerous post-Civil War problems, and was often cited as being corrupt and running a corrupt administration. Though he never was implicated in any wrongdoing, his second inauguration proved to be more difficult than the first.</p>
			<p>Grant’s second inauguration was one of the coldest in American history, with driving winds and a temperature near zero degrees. The weather was as horrible as it might be. Spectators lined up in the middle of Pennsylvania Avenue, standing on streetcar tracks with people and carriages traveling along the northern side of the avenue. Marchers tried to take advantage of the recent street improvements but still suffered wind-blown dirt in their faces. People took advantage of every piece of warm clothes they could wear, hoping to gain some warmth against the temperature and the wind. Still, the event was festive; every building was draped with majestic cloth and bunting.</p>
			<p>The most impressive part of the entire day was the parade, which consisted of marching bands and military units, some 12,000 people in all. Even African Americans were included. Some of the marchers, for example, West Point cadets and Annapolis midshipmen, suffered severe frostbite. U.S. Grant joined the parade march from the White House, along Pennsylvania Avenue, wearing a thick overcoat, and riding in an open carriage pulled by four magnificent horses. Men and women cheered when they saw Grant, and a young boy all wrapped in warm clothes, briefly ran alongside the carriage, yelling “Hurrah for Grant.” When the president reached the Capital, he mounted the inaugural stand on the east side. At precisely 12:30 PM. Salmon P. Chase, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, swore Grant in, and the president gave his inaugural address. Few could hear him because of the howling wind. A photographer set up a tower and took as many pictures as he could. The crowd seemed pleased with his effort.</p>
			<p>His address was not long, and the frozen audience must have been happy that Grant kept his rhetoric relatively brief. He wrote his own address, and his thoughts at that time were obvious. He was pleased to have won re-election. He was also happy that he could say something positive about the aftermath of the Civil War even though he recognized that three former states had not yet returned to the Union. He was overconfident when he indicated that all was going well within the United States during his first term, but he went too far when he insisted that the world was moving inexorably toward “republicanism” and that the United States was “destined to be the guiding star to all others.” He was obviously happy that the telegraph and steam power were pushing the nation into a union never before enjoyed.</p>
			<p>Then, however, he quickly switched to the major problem that the nation was still suffering. Black people did not yet enjoy their rightful social equality. He did not want to overemphasize this phenomenon, although he did want to give the black man a “fair chance to develop what there is good in him, give him access to the schools, and when he travels let him feel assured that his conduct will regulate the treatment and fare he will receive.” The amazing fact was that Grant was saying these words in 1873, long before the nation was ready to guarantee such rights to black people. (And, he was proud that no federal force was being used on any of the former rebellious states).</p>
			<p>President Grant also indicated that he would continue to support gold as the monetary standard and support international trade linking the world together. He clearly believed that the American Indian “be made a useful and productive member of society by proper teaching and treatment.” He hoped too that civil service reform would be made an essential part of the nation’s future.</p>
			<p>The second term president wanted everyone within the sound of his voice (and because of the wind, few fit into this category) to know that he appreciated that the nation had given him the honor of its leadership. He promised that he would always do his best, and wanted everyone to realize that he never asked for any “place or position” and that he would never be “vengeful” toward the South or any individual within it. He promised, too, never to ask for “promotion or command.”</p>
			<p>Finally, Grant reminded his listeners: “I have been the subject of abuse and slander scarcely ever equaled in political history.” But being the beneficiary of the nation’s good feelings as expressed in this presidency, he believed firmly that, “in view of your verdict. . .I gratefully accept this honor as my vindication.”</p>
			<p>In short, therefore, U.S. Grant, in giving his second inaugural address, indicated his willingness to serve another term in office and to continue his good work for the benefit of the nation. The cold did not deter his great plans for the future, but it was certainly a bad omen for his second term.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
