<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 118</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-118" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of George W. Bush</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> James Mann</h3>
			<p>George W. Bush was the first president in more than a century to lose the popular vote but win the Electoral College; one had to go back to Benjamin Harrison in 1888 to find a comparable election. Bush had, moreover, won in the Electoral College only after the Supreme Court had ruled, by the close vote of 5 to 4, that Florida’s electoral votes should be awarded to him and not his Democratic opponent, Al Gore. Under those circumstances, Bush chose the theme for his Inaugural Address to be one of civility, delivering a speech that offered only a few glimpses of the initiatives and ideas that would follow in his presidency. Yet they were in the speech, if one looked closely.</p>
			<p>The dispute in Florida had been bitter and prolonged, arousing passions and partisanship that were still raw on Inauguration Day. Despite the damp, foggy weather, roughly 300,000 people turned out on the streets of Washington. Protesters carried signs that said, “Hail to the Thief.” Bush supporters, in turn, countered with placards that said, “W Stands for Winner.”</p>
			<p>Gathered around the stage for the swearing-in was an array of leaders who had dominated public life in America in previous years or would do so in the years to come. The leaders of the past started with Bush’s proud, teary father George H.W. Bush; the Bushes were that day about to become the first father-son team of presidents since the Adams family. The outgoing president Bill Clinton sat on the stage, too, along with Gore, the outgoing vice president. Hillary Clinton, who had two weeks earlier been elected to the U.S. Senate, sat alongside her husband. The master of ceremonies for the day’s events was Mitch McConnell, who was then the Senate majority whip. Looking on from a choice seat just off the stage was the mayor of New York, Rudy Giuliani, just entering into what many assumed would be a relatively uneventful final year in office.</p>
			<p>What George W. Bush gave them and those who watched on television that day was a 14-minute paean to civic virtues, repeatedly emphasizing the importance of showing respect to political opponents. He first thanked Clinton for his service and then thanked Gore for “a contest conducted with spirit and ended with grace.” Bush alluded to the partisan divisions of the election in soothing terms. “Sometimes our differences run so deep, it seems we share a continent, but not a country. We do not accept this and we will not allow it,” Bush said. Not just once but three times he returned specifically to the theme of civility in political discourse. “Civility is not a tactic or a sentiment. It is the determined choice of trust over cynicism, of community over chaos,” he asserted.</p>
			<p>After all the tensions of the disputed election, the reaction to these passages would be overwhelmingly positive. “A Step Toward Common Ground,” a headline on the front page of the <i>Washington Post</i> said the following day. The <i>New York Times</i> news analysis said Bush had “started to dispel the challenges to his legitimacy.” Liberal columnist E.J. Dionne called the speech “excellent” and “Bush at his best.”</p>
			<p>The address, written by Bush’s speechwriter Michael Gerson, was cast mostly in terms of abstractions and ideals. Yet within the speech, there were also just a few words and phrases that served brief notice of the political battles that would later come to dominate George W. Bush’s presidency. In fact, the speech contained offerings to each of the three conservative constituencies that had helped Bush win the Republican nomination.</p>
			<p>Some history is in order here. Ronald Reagan had assembled a Republican coalition that had brought together tax-cutting libertarians, foreign-policy hawks, and evangelicals. All three of these constituencies had then, in different ways, become disaffected with President George H.W. Bush. Throughout the 1990s, in the wake of his father’s failure to win re-election, George W. Bush forged strong links to all three of these conservative factions within the party. He had, for example, promised substantial tax cuts during his presidential campaign.</p>
			<p>In his Inaugural Address, George W. Bush gave a nod to each constituency. For economic conservatives, Bush promised, “We will reform Social Security and Medicare.⁠ ⁠… And we will reduce taxes to recover the momentum of our economy.” As it turned out, Bush would not press hard to privatize Social Security until his second term, and even then he failed. But he would move for significant taxes cuts in the first six months of his presidency, and in that he succeeded.</p>
			<p>For evangelicals, the speech contained religious references, indeed ten of them in the short address. “When we see that wounded traveler on the road to Jericho, we will not pass to the other side,” said Bush, referring to the parable of the Good Samaritan. This and the other references were offered as part of Bush’s campaign theme of compassionate conservatism. It included, among other things, the idea of faith-based initiatives that would take social programs out of the control of the government and into the hands of churches and charities. That idea, too, could be found in the Inaugural, though couched in abstract wording: “Compassion is the work of a nation, not just a government,” Bush asserted. “And some needs and some hurts are so deep they will only respond to a mentor’s touch or a pastor’s prayer.”</p>
			<p>So then what about foreign policy? Where in this Inaugural are any precursors to the future war in Iraq, the single aspect of Bush’s presidency for which he would most be remembered? Where, in other words, are the references in the speech aimed at hawks or neoconservatives?</p>
			<p>One answer might be that the September 11 attacks, which set in motion the chain of events leading up to the Iraq War, hadn’t happened yet. On Inauguration Day, there were already a few within the administration who were pressing for more aggressive action against Saddam Hussein, but at that point, it was a secondary issue; at the time of the Inaugural, the neoconservatives had other priorities. At the top of their wish list was the desire for the United States to withdraw from the ABM Treaty of 1972, which stood in the way of the United States constructing missile-defense systems. In the careful phrasing of Bush’s Inaugural, they could find a passage alluding to missile defense: “We will confront weapons of mass destruction, so that a new century is spared new horrors.” Eleven months later, Bush would announce that the United States was formally withdrawing from the ABM treaty.</p>
			<p>The word <em>Iraq</em> itself isn’t in the speech. But look carefully and one finds a seemingly cryptic seven-word phrase that hints at some the broader ideas and the intellectual debates that led up to the Iraq War. Bush declared at one point that America sought to shape “<em>a balance of power that favors freedom</em>.”</p>
			<p>That phrase almost certainly came from Condoleezza Rice, who had served as the principal foreign-policy advisor during Bush’s campaign and was that day taking over as his national security advisor. The phrase was an allusion to the longstanding debates over realism vs. idealism in foreign policy, Rice had written an article for <i>Foreign Affairs</i> the previous year that discussed the idea and limits of a balance-of-power approach to the world, and in the fall of 2002, as the United States was moving determinedly toward war with Iraq, she gave a speech that was specifically entitled, “A Balance of Power that Favors Freedom.”</p>
			<p>What did that mean? Again, some background is relevant here. The neoconservative movement first became galvanized in foreign policy during the Nixon administration, in opposition to Henry Kissinger’s balance-of-power diplomacy in general and to détente with the Soviet Union in particular. Careful balance-of-power considerations then once again dominated the thinking of the George H.W. Bush administration, during which the president and his national security advisor Brent Scowcroft had labored to avoid a break in relations with China and had sought to slow down the break-up of the Soviet Union. Indeed, one of the several reasons the George H.W. Bush administration had decided not to go on to Baghdad at the end of the Persian Gulf War in 1991 had been a balance-of-power consideration: the desire to leave Iraq in a position to serve as a counterweight to Iran.</p>
			<p>Rice herself had been a protégé of Scowcroft. She and others in the administration were not prepared, at the very start of the new administration, to throw out completely the concept of balance of power diplomacy. But they also wanted to acknowledge the neoconservative argument that a reliance on balance-of-power considerations fails to take into account the ideals of freedom and democracy. Hence, “<em>a balance of power that favors freedom</em>” amounted to a declaration that the new administration would not be governed by realist, balance-of-power concerns to the extent that Bush’s father’s administration had been.</p>
			<p>Finally, the wording of Bush’s Inaugural also suggested to an activist, interventionist role for the United States overseas. A decade after the end of the Cold War, more than a few Americans were arguing that there were not many causes America needed to become involved in overseas. Bush rejected that notion. “The stakes for America are never small,” he said. “If our country does not lead the cause of freedom, it will not be led.”</p>
			<p>There was very little commentary concerning these phrases in the speech on Inauguration Day or the days afterward. They were mostly lost amid Bush’s repeated appeals for civility and unity. Indeed, at the time of the Inauguration, there was considerable speculation that, the new president, having come to the White House, without a majority of the popular vote, Bush would of necessity have to move to the center of the political spectrum and to win Democratic support in order to govern.</p>
			<p>It didn’t turn out that way. Bush pressed hard for tax cuts in the earliest months of his presidency and got them passed in the face of substantial Democratic opposition. The following year he began driving toward a war with Iraq that produced even more intense divisions within the country than had the 2000 election.</p>
			<p>Throughout it all, Bush remained generally civil to his political opponents, in striking contrast with the next Republican president, Donald Trump. But for Bush, civility in style definitely did not mean centrism in substance.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
