<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Handsome Frank: The Inaugural Address of Franklin Pierce: by Peter A. Wallner</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Handsome Frank: The Inaugural Address of Franklin Pierce</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Peter A. Wallner</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>After a campaign of mutual innuendo and charges by both candidates, on November 2, 1852, Franklin Pierce was elected 14th President of the United States by a landslide. Pierce won 21 of the 27 states that then constituted the Union. His opponent was the Whig candidate, Winfield Scott, who would serve as the Commander of the Army throughout Pierce’s term despite not getting along with Pierce’s choice for Secretary of War, Jefferson Davis. Despite this fact, he was able to choose a Cabinet, led by Davis and Secretary of State William L. Marcy, which stayed together for the next four years—the first time in U.S. history that a Cabinet remained intact for an entire presidential term, with no resignations. As Pierce’s secretary, Sidney Webster, wrote, “The elements of that Cabinet were such that, if left without a controlling chief, it would have broken asunder in a week.” What kept them together was their mutual respect, even fondness, for Pierce.</p>
			<p>Less than two months prior to the inauguration, the event was marred by the death of the Pierce's only surviving child, 11-year-old Benny, in a train wreck. Pierce was unable to choose his Cabinet until after the funeral, and Jane Piece, who was always unstable mentally, was totally unable to resolve his death with her very fundamentalist religious views. Jane’s cousin wrote at the time, “you cannot but tremble for one who is always so depressed and now has such bitter cause.” There was concern that Jane would not rally to become a comfort to her husband in time for the inauguration, and, in fact, this was the case. The inaugural ball was canceled. She stayed in Baltimore with friends, and on March 2, her husband traveled to the city to read Jane his inaugural address. She seemed completely uninterested in the address and insisted that politics be forgotten for the moment. Instead, he left abruptly, and Jane was unable to share her feelings with him and to give him a lock of his son’s hair, which she hoped he would keep near him on Inauguration Day.</p>
			<p>Inauguration Day was a cold, raw March day with light snow falling as Pierce prepared for the inaugural ceremonies. The procession to the Capitol began at City Hall and marched to Willard’s Hotel, where President Fillmore joined the parade in an open carriage. It was noon when Pierce left the hotel and climbed into the carriage next to the President. The two men rode down Pennsylvania Avenue, in the barouche, accompanied by Senators Bright and Hamlin. All the way down the Avenue, Pierce stood up in the carriage bare-headed and waved to the people gathered on both sides. There were an estimated 70,000 visitors in the city for the inauguration. The Vice-president elect, William Rufus DeVane King, was in Cuba in a vain attempt to restore his health; he suffered from tuberculosis and would die shortly after the inauguration. The preliminary ceremony of the swearing-in of the vice president was dispensed with, and Senator Bright led Pierce from the chamber to the east front of the Capitol, where he took the oath of office from Chief Justice Roger B. Taney. Pierce also broke precedent by affirming rather than swearing to uphold the Constitution.</p>
			<p>The nation’s youngest President to that time turned and faced the crowd of some 15,000 who stood before him. In the confident manner of the “easy lawyer and speaker,” he began to address the crowd. Pierce spoke for the next 30 minutes entirely from memory. Though he kept the document by his side, he delivered his inaugural address from memory. He began with a statement he had added to the speech that morning, speaking of the recent death of his son: “My Countrymen. It is a relief to feel that no heart but my own can know the personal regret and bitter sorrow over which I have been borne to a position so suitable for others rather than desirable for myself.” The address was an eloquent summary of all that Jacksonian Democracy stood for. While it did not propose a specific agenda, the speech was generally praised by the press. The politically neutral Baltimore Sun wrote, “No similar document, that we remember, met with such general favor…” On reading the speech, H. R. French, a judge in New Hampshire, wrote, “The inaugural is first rate and pleases all parties. He has a wonderful gift of propriety in all his acts, and words, and writing. I should have written about such address as that had I been President.”</p>
			<p>Fillmore accompanied the new president back to the White House and then took his leave. The new president received guests throughout the rest of the day. He stood for hours shaking hands with all comers before finally making his way upstairs to the family quarters. Since the Fillmore’s had not moved out completely, due to the illness of Mrs. Fillmore, the new president had to make due by assigning one room to his secretary, Sidney Webster, and retired to the other room.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
