<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 110</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-110" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Second Inaugural Address of Ronald Reagan</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Iwan W. Morgan</h3>
			<p>Ronald Reagan’s inauguration to a second term as president marked the fiftieth inaugural ceremony in American history and the only one ever to be held indoors in the Capitol Rotunda (bitterly cold weather had ruled out the traditional open-air ceremony). At 2,561 words, his inaugural address was the longest for a second-term president since James Monroe’s tally of 4,472 in 1821. Reagan had delivered his first inaugural address in 1981 amid the worst economic conditions since the Great Depression of the 1930s and at a dangerous time in the Cold War when the Soviet Union appeared to have gained ascendancy over the United States. In 1985, however, the country was once more prosperous, secure, and optimistic about the future. In recognition of this, voters had re-elected Reagan to a second term in 1984 by a landslide over Democrat Walter Mondale&mdash;he received 58.8 percent of the popular vote and carried every state except Minnesota (plus the District of Columbia). His second Inaugural Address spoke to America’s restored confidence in expressing pride at the progress made in the last four years and looking ahead to what needed to be done in the next four to consolidate national renewal. In many ways, it followed on in spirit from the iconic political commercial of his re-election campaign, "It’s morning again in America."</p>
			<p>In his first Inaugural Address, Reagan insisted that restoration of prosperity depended on reducing the size of the federal government and cutting federal taxes in order to incentivize wealth-creation by individual Americans. This conservative anti-statist message was also at the heart of his 1985 address, which identified the two key domestic goals of his second administration as being tax reform and deficit elimination. With regard to the former, he avowed, "We must simplify our tax system, make it more fair and bring the rates down for all who work and earn." These words heralded the enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, the most significant tax reform measure of the second half of the twentieth century. This simplified the tax code into two brackets (instead of fourteen), removed the working poor from the tax rolls, and eliminated or reduced numerous tax-breaks enjoyed by business and investors to pay for this largesse.</p>
			<p>In contrast, Reagan fell far short in his pursuit of a balanced budget because he wanted to achieve one entirely through domestic program retrenchment whereas Democrats and Republican fiscal hawks in Congress called for military cutbacks and tax increases. This failure to find political agreement also doomed Reagan’s advocacy in the 1985 inaugural address of a constitutional amendment to stop the federal government spending more than it took in annually in taxes. Instead of restoring fiscal discipline, he would preside over an era of unprecedented deficit expansion and public debt growth: in 1981 he had told Americans that gross federal debt was equivalent to a stack of $1,000 bills 67 miles high, but when he left office the pile was some 200 miles high.</p>
			<p>Reagan’s 1985 Inaugural Address also referenced America’s recent progress in advancing African American civil rights but acknowledged that more needed to be done to build a country "rich in dignity and abundant with opportunity for all our citizens." These good intentions fell on largely deaf black ears. African Americans were the one group who remained resistant to his optimistic vision of America’s future because they resented his first-term retrenchment of public assistance programmes and his continuing toleration of lilywhite private Christian schools in the South. In his last year in office, Reagan would veto the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1988 to strengthen educational desegregation on grounds that this represented an unjustified expansion of federal authority over the decisions of private organizations. This made him the first president since Andrew Johnson in 1866 to veto a civil rights bill, but he was quickly overridden by Congress.</p>
			<p>If Reagan’s upbeat inaugural vision of America’s future did not endear him to African Americans, it was also out of step with the constrained economic prospects of millions of ordinary Americans, regardless of their race, Notwithstanding the Great Depression, the US economy performed remarkably well in the first 75 years of the twentieth century in keeping average income mostly rising and economic inequality mainly falling. In the years from the late 1970s to the present, the former has stagnated and the latter has soared. Broader structural changes in the economy pertaining to the growing significance of finance and technology and the loss of manufacturing jobs made it harder for many in the lower half of the income distribution to secure decently-paid employment. Nevertheless, Reagan’s economic policies contributed to rising income inequality because they disproportionately benefited the wealthy in reducing government and cutting taxes.</p>
			<p>Reagan’s 1985 inaugural address focused mainly on domestic issues but gave much more attention to foreign and defense issues than its 1981 predecessor. In his first term he had launched America’s greatest defense expansion since the Korean War to overtake the perceived lead that the Soviets had gained in defence capabilities in the 1970s. This had intensified the Cold War, causing many Americans to grow concerned that the world was heading for nuclear confrontation. Seeking to reassure them that his goal was "peace through strength", Reagan put increasing emphasis on his desire to negotiate nuclear-arms reduction in his re-election campaign. Continuing this theme, his 1985 Inaugural Address looked forward to "the total elimination one day of nuclear weapons from the face of the Earth." In it, he also spoke of his plans for research into the development of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), popularly dubbed "Star Wars", to construct a space-based security shield that could prevent incoming missiles from reaching America in the event of a nuclear attack.</p>
			<p>In his second term, Reagan’s determination to follow through on nuclear arms reduction made greater progress than almost everyone but him expected. He was fortunate to deal with a new Kremlin leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, who realized that the Soviet economy could not sustain the arms race. In four summit meetings at Geneva, Reykjavik, Washington and Moscow, their negotiations produced the Intermediate Nuclear Force Treaty of 1987, which eliminated an entire class of nuclear weapons for the first time in history, and laid the foundations for the peaceful termination of the Cold War in the early 1990s. Paradoxically, SDI was a stumbling block in their early talks because Reagan would not agree to its elimination. Gorbachev decided, however, that he should not throw away the chance of lasting peace for a weapon still only in the research phase of development.</p>
			<p>Reagan’s second term would end on a great foreign policy triumph but international affairs nearly undid him prior to this success. In contrast to his 1981 address that portrayed the rising threat of communism, his 1985 inaugural spoke of freedom, "one of the deepest and noblest aspirations of the human spirit," being on the march in the world, nowhere more so than in America’s own hemisphere, and promised support for its advance. This was a veiled reference to the secret financial assistance to buy arms that the Reagan administration was providing, in violation of congressional prohibitions, for the Contra rebels in their campaign to overthrow the Marxist Sandinista government of Nicaragua. This illegal initiative soon intersected with another to sell arms to Iran in violation of American and international law in return for its help in freeing US hostages held by Islamist groups in the Lebanon. In late 1986, shortly after funds from these sales began to be diverted to the Contras, both operations came to light. Reagan found himself under scrutiny for his role in the so-called Iran-Contra affair that might have become his Watergate, but investigators accepted his disavowals of detailed knowledge of the transactions.</p>
			<p>Reagan had no thought of what lay ahead with Iran-Contra when delivering his 1985 Inaugural Address, one of the most optimistic of all time. The fortieth president’s confidence in his country shines through it. The address contained several historical references to how Americans had endured difficult times in the past while remaining united in their common cause of advancing freedom. An extended passage spoke of how two of the founders, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, had renewed their friendship in old age after falling out over the election of 1800. Far from being nostalgic for bygone times, Reagan’s historical parables were intended to guide America’s future, which he believed would be even greater than its past. Essential for this in his mind was that his fellow-citizens should focus on what united rather than divided them. Today’s Americans might profitably read (or listen to) the 1985 Inaugural Address to heed its stress on national unity. Ronald Reagan, one suspects, would have been uncomfortable with the political polarization of the early twenty-first century.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
