<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 44</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-44" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Second Inaugural Address of Abraham Lincoln</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Richard John Carwardine</h3>
			<p>On the morning of Saturday March 4, 1865, Abraham Lincoln emerged from the Capitol building to address some 30,000 people gathered for the inauguration of his second term. For the first time on such an occasion his audience included thousands of African Americans. To music and cheers, he took his place on the platform. As he took the oath of office, the sun burst through the clouds: a symbol, it seemed to many, of divine approval and the recent turn in the nation’s fortunes.</p>
			<p>Four years earlier, at his first inauguration, Lincoln had appeared vigorous; now he had, as one reporter put it, the look of a man “on whom sorrow and care have done their worst.” Yet he had reason to be buoyant. The war had entered its final phase. The political outlook, too, was encouraging. Vindicated by his re-election, Lincoln had successfully set about driving an emancipation amendment through Congress. Electoral triumph, military progress, and the death spasms of slavery gave Lincoln a greater sense of presidential authority than he had previously enjoyed.</p>
			<p>Delivered in a strong, clear voice, Lincoln’s speech bespoke a powerful self-confidence. A fraction over 700 words, it was the shortest inaugural address in the history of the Republic. It began with a flat, matter-of-fact introduction: an extended review of political and military progress was unnecessary, he said, since the events were well-known to all. By contrast each of the three succeeding paragraphs was rich in concentrated meaning and striking rhetoric.</p>
			<p>The first summarized the process by which the nation had fallen into war. It is notable for Lincoln’s broad even-handedness. He located the war’s origins in a dispute over the Union. One side wanted to save it, the other to destroy it. Although “destroy” is a not a neutral term, Lincoln does not assign blame for the armed conflict: “all sought to avert it⁠ ⁠… Both parties deprecated war.”</p>
			<p>The next paragraph⁠–⁠the longest⁠–⁠moved on from a summary narrative of the coming of war to a causal explanation of the conflict. Southern slavery “constituted a peculiar and powerful interest. All knew that this interest was somehow the cause of the war. To strengthen, perpetuate, and extend this interest was the object for which the insurgents would rend the Union even by war, while the government claimed no right to do more than to restrict the territorial enlargement of it.” The war, Lincoln reflected, had developed into a struggle whose dimensions and duration “neither party expected.⁠ ⁠… Each looked for an easier triumph, and a result less fundamental and astounding.”</p>
			<p>Then followed a sentence that launched the speech in a direction that few expected: “Both [parties] read the same Bible and pray to the same God, and each invokes His aid against the other.” The religious turn makes the speech unique amongst presidential inaugural addresses. Successive generations have marveled at the depth of Lincoln’s theology, especially about God’s will and His divine judgment on the American nation. In this address he mentions God fourteen times, quotes four times from Scripture, and talks about prayer on three occasions.</p>
			<p>As the historian Douglas Wilson has shown, the president grew increasingly ambitious in the themes he sought to convey in his wartime public utterances. With a Union victory now likely, he sought a way of conveying that the war had been about the violation of the inalienable rights set out in the Declaration of Independence, and that complicity in the offense of slaveholding was not confined to the Confederacy.</p>
			<p>Delivering this hard message, Lincoln judged, could be best achieved through religious language and ideas familiar to an audience that comprised mostly Protestant Christians, and amongst whom he was viewed as a man of faith⁠–⁠as “a sort of half way clergyman,” as one admirer put it. They would not have been surprised by the tenor of the speech, nor Lincoln’s appeal to the book of Genesis and Jesus’s sermon on the Mount: “It may seem strange that any men should dare to ask a just God’s assistance in wringing their bread from the sweat of other men’s faces, but let us judge not, that we be not judged.”</p>
			<p>Lincoln here used a well-known oratorical technique: emphasizing something by purporting not to intend it. Although he implies that the “strange” stance of slaveholders was a form of hypocrisy, this was less a sly dig at the South than a prelude to a statement that formed the theological center of the speech: “The prayers of both [contending sides] could not be answered; that of neither has been answered fully. The Almighty has His own purposes.”</p>
			<p>By these means Lincoln prepared his audience for a wrenching passage that implicated both North and South in the sin of slavery. “The bond-man’s two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil” was an offense against “a living God” who had to be recognized as a force in human affairs. If it were God’s will that “the scourge of war” should continue, “until all the wealth piled by the bondsman’s two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash, shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said ‘the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether’ ” (Psalm 19).</p>
			<p>This national complicity in the sin of slavery opened the way for Lincoln’s memorable concluding paragraph, the core political purpose of his speech. Here he echoed the words of Malachi, invoking God’s judgment against the oppressors of the widow and the fatherless:</p>
			<p>
				<blockquote>With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in, to bind up the nation’s wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan, to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and a lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations.</blockquote>
			</p>
			<p>Lincoln was a kindly man, who by his own estimate probably had “too little” of the feeling of personal resentment. He saw the irony that, as someone who did not bear a grudge, he had found himself at the center of so profound a conflict.</p>
			<p>The address was designed to prepare the way for a post-war reconciliatory reconstruction incumbent on the whole nation. The institution described as “peculiar” to the South owed its introduction and continued existence to the whole nation’s moral deficiencies. At no point does Lincoln call the South “the enemy,” “rebels,” or even “Confederates”; his language is inclusive. He understood that the self-righteousness that had inflected wartime Unionism would not serve the nation well in peacetime.</p>
			<p>The president’s shocking assassination deprived the nation of a Lincolnian scheme of reconstruction, so we can only speculate on what would have constituted a course that he wanted to see shaped by “firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right.” On April 11, four days before his death, he addressed a crowd that had gathered outside the White House to celebrate the Confederate surrender at Appomattox. We may see this speech as Lincoln’s opening position in a debate with Congress. He declared his preference that the vote be conferred on two categories of African Americans: “the very intelligent, and⁠ ⁠… those who serve our cause as soldiers.” Was this a step towards the radical minority who wanted full suffrage for freedmen and the confiscation of rebels’ land? We cannot know for certain, since in the crowd there was one who was determined the president should not have the opportunity to act. John Wilkes Booth took Lincoln’s words to be heralds of a world turned upside down.</p>
			<p>Frederick Douglass, invited by Lincoln to the White House reception after the ceremony, told the President that the address was “a sacred effort.” Lincoln was undoubtedly pleased. But he was aware, too, of the risk he had run in delivering a speech that broke so completely with public expectations. It was in both its religion and its politics a startling, challenging, and potentially transformative document. Lincoln fully understood this. He wrote to a fellow Republican:</p>
			<p>
				<blockquote>I expect the [inaugural address] to wear as well as⁠—perhaps better than⁠—any thing I have produced; but I believe it is not immediately popular. Men are not flattered by being shown that there has been a difference of purpose between the Almighty and them. To deny it, however, in this case, is to deny that there is a God governing the world. It is a truth which I thought needed to be told; and as whatever of humiliation there is in it, falls most directly on myself, I thought others might afford for me to tell it.</blockquote>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
