<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>On Opposite Ends: Andrew Johnson's Address Upon Assuming the Office of President of the United States, by Michael Les Benedict</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-46" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">On Opposite Ends<br/>
				Andrew Johnson's Address Upon Assuming the Office of President of the United States</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Michael Les Benedict</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was one of the worst days in American history. Abraham Lincoln had been shot the night before. Vice President Andrew Johnson had been targeted as well, but the assassin had lost his nerve. Johnson had rushed to Lincoln’s side but he soon left. He did not want to look like he was hovering in anticipation of the worst, which clearly was coming. He returned to the hotel room where he had been lodging since arriving in Washington for his inauguration. That had not gone well. Sick and feverish after his long trip to the capital, he had fortified himself with whiskey, no more than what usually braced him but too much for someone who was ill. He had been unsteady, disorganized. He had slurred his words. Lincoln took it calmly, but others had been shocked. Mortified, Johnson had retreated to the estate of his friend Frank Blair, Sr. He had only recently returned to the hotel. Now, he knew he would become president. He awaited the dreaded notification.</p>
			<p>Members of Lincoln’s cabinet, a few senators and representatives, Johnson’s friend Frank Blair, and his son Montgomery silently filed into Johnson’s room. Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase somberly administered the oath of office specified in the Constitution. Johnson repeated it gravely, “very distinctively and impressively,” to the relief of any who worried he might repeat the earlier fiasco. “May God support, guide, and bless you,” Chase said earnestly.</p>
			<p>Johnson had no time to prepare a speech. His response was only 360 words⁠—a few more than Washington had said at his second inauguration and a bit longer than Millard Fillmore’s statement following the death of President Zachary Taylor. He was not prepared to say anything about the most pressing matter before him—the mode of restoring the Confederate states to the Union. That “must be left for development as the Administration progresses.” He could only point to what he had done in the past as the best guarantee of the future. He had worked all his life to do what was right, “to establish and perpetuate the principles of free government.” He had always worked to secure the “popular rights” of “the great mass of the American people.” “This has been the foundation of my political creed,” he said.</p>
			<p>Johnson had harkened to the basic myths of American political identity—“free government” and “popular rights.” But rarely has a statement of public principle been so vague. The only way to guess how Johnson would apply such general principles was to take his advice and look at what he had said and done.</p>
			<p>Johnson had not said much in Congress. He had seemed a typical proslavery southern senator, blasting abolitionists and warning northerners to respect southern rights. But he had never taken up reams of paper like other southerners to define his notion of slaveholders’ rights. He agreed that Congress could not exclude slavery from the territories, but he had not been outspoken against or in favor of Stephen A. Douglas’s idea of leaving the matter to settlers in the territories. Nor had he endorsed Jefferson Davis’s demand that Congress establish a slave code in the territories. He had spent most of his energy trying to pass a law giving homesteads to western settlers—a concrete manifestation of his concern for ordinary Americans.</p>
			<p>He never questioned slavery before the war, but he had stood for the interests of yeoman, farmers against those of large planters and cotton merchants. He reflected the views of his strongest constituency—the hill-country farmers of East Tennessee. Like them, he was inclined to fight for southern rights within the Union. After Lincoln’s election in November 1860, most southern opponents of secession claimed to favor delay until all southerners could cooperate to resist clearly intolerable northern demands. Johnson scorned such equivocations. He would defend the Union until northerners took concrete actions against slavery. He was sure his eastern Tennessee constituents felt the same. When other southern senators resigned from the Senate as their states seceded, Johnson was the only one who remained, promising to hang the traitors if he got the chance. At the same time, he co-authored the congressional resolution declaring that the war was to preserve the Union and nothing more.</p>
			<p>After federal troops occupied central and western Tennessee, President Lincoln appointed Johnson military governor, with the assignment of organizing loyal Tennesseans to establish a government that adhered to the Union. In that capacity, Johnson had exercised sweeping authority. From the beginning he knew he had to break down the disloyalty that blocked the establishment of a loyal government. “Traitors should be punished and treason crushed,” he declared when he arrived. He repeated that mantra again and again. He vacated municipal offices and appointed loyal replacements, jailed and exiled those who refused to take loyalty oaths, forced disloyal newspapers to close. He demanded a stricter loyalty oath than Lincoln required. Conservative unionists organized to oppose his draconian measures. Radical unionists organized to back him. When Lincoln finally made emancipation a war issue, Johnson and his radical unionists endorsed him. But he was not very sympathetic to the former slaves; abolition of slavery would free the white masses from the despotism of slaveholding aristocrats, he argued. He required that the courts treat former slaves as “free persons of color,” not as citizens.</p>
			<p>Johnson had toured the North delivering fiery Union speeches and endorsing emancipation. Lincoln and the Republicans saw him as a symbol of the loyal South, and a Democrat as well. Desperate to create a cluster of southern loyalists upon which to build loyal states, Lincoln and other party leaders seized on Johnson as a representative example, nominating him as their vice-presidential candidate on what they called the Union ticket. By nominating him, Johnson had said, the Union party affirmed “that the rebellious States are still in the Union, that their loyal citizens are still citizens of the United States.” It was a crucial question. No matter what the government of a state did, those who remained loyal to the Union remained American citizens, with the rights of American citizens.</p>
			<p>A radical Republican like Ohio’s Senator Benjamin F. Wade should have foreseen the problem. Like many radical Republicans, Wade thought secession had disrupted southern governments and their relations with the federal Union. They would not be entitled to restoration until Congress said they were. That meant that their citizens, even those who had remained loyal to the Union, were not entitled to representation in Congress. Along with Representative Henry Winter Davies, Wade had authored a reconstruction bill that reflected that understanding. He was furious when Lincoln refused to sign it. What Wade saw in Johnson’s record was that he was more determined than Lincoln to keep southern government out of the hands of traitors. “Johnson, we have faith in you,” Wade told him as he took office. “There will be no trouble now in running the government.”</p>
			<p>It turned out that Republicans had misjudged him. He had always insisted that loyal citizens had retained all their rights despite the treason of their state governments. Johnson’s denunciations of the disloyal, his arrests, had always been designed to coerce loyalty. He had allowed exiles to return once they took the required oaths; he had let traitors out of jail. During the war, few had taken up his blandishments. They would not betray allies who were still fighting for southern rights. But once the war ended, that consideration evaporated. Johnson did require leading Confederates to seek individual pardons from him personally rather than simply take a loyalty oath. But, to his amazed gratification, nearly all applied. All that remained was to re-establish loyal governments and let the revitalized states resume their places in the Union, with their now loyal citizens once again represented in Congress. Ratify the Thirteenth Amendment abolishing slavery, amend state constitutions to do the same, nullify the secession ordinances, and repudiate the debts incurred to sustain the rebellion, he demanded. Those actions would demonstrate renewed loyalty. That the restored states would decide the status of the freed slaves did not trouble him in the least. This program would restore the republican self-government to which he had dedicated his career. In a society without slaves, the masses whose interests he had always championed would be free of a slaveholding aristocracy. It became clear that he had never included black southerners among “the great mass of the American people.” The “American people” were white, and racial equality threatened their interests.</p>
			<p>Through the years of turmoil that followed, Johnson always believed he was staying true to the principles he had articulated in his brief address upon taking office. The Republicans who broke with him, including most of the radical Unionists in Tennessee, violated the principles undergirding popular government. In his view, keeping southern states out of the Union in a fanatic effort to protect the rights of freed slaves was a flagrant violation of constitutional democracy. Sure of his ideals, he would fight the Republicans as vigorously and as vehemently as he had fought the secessionists.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
