<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 14</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Second Inaugural Address of James Madison</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> J. C. A. Stagg</h3>
			<p>At noon on 4 March 1813 James Madison delivered his second inaugural address before a concourse of congressmen, diplomats, judges, and other residents of the nation’s capital. As he was drafting his remarks, the president’s thoughts undoubtedly recurred to the message he had sent to Congress on 1 June 1812, listing the reasons why he believed the United States should declare war against Great Britain. That message had been organized as a catalogue of the violations of American neutral rights and sovereignty committed by Great Britain after 1803. It culminated in the prediction that the national legislature would issue a declaration worthy of “the enlightened and patriotic Councils of a virtuous, a free, and powerful nation” before concluding with the hint that the international situation of the republic was so fraught with difficulties that a war against France might also be necessary.</p>
			<p>The intervening nine months had not gone well for the Madison administration. The principal justification for the war⁠&mdash;Great Britain’s seemingly inflexible adherence to the trade restrictions embodied in the Orders in Council⁠&mdash;had been removed in London five days after the commencement of hostilities on 18 June 1812. Worse, the United States proved to be a far less powerful nation than Madison had wished. Three invasions of the British provinces of Upper and Lower Canada had ended in embarrassing failures, with one of them resulting in the loss of Detroit and the Michigan territory to numerically inferior British forces and their Native American allies. The U.S. Army had been unable to equip and train the forces raised since the spring of 1812. Admittedly, the infant U.S. Navy had exceeded low expectations by winning three encounters at sea with British frigates, but there had been no comparable successes on the Great Lakes, which would have facilitated the operations of American land forces. Consequently, the British government was under no pressure to engage in negotiations over the grievances Madison had outlined in June. Nor had France improved its relations with the United States. Instead, Napoleon had embarked on the invasion of Russia at the very same moment the United States went to war with Great Britain. Madison had anticipated that Napoleon would win his war⁠&mdash;thereby making Russia’s British ally more amenable to ending its American war⁠&mdash;but by early 1813 it was clear that Napoleon had sustained a massive defeat, with French imperial forces in full retreat from eastern Europe. Great Britain was now in an even stronger position vis-à-vis the United States.</p>
			<p>This was the situation Madison faced as he entered on his second term, immediately after three difficult months with the second session of the Twelfth Congress. Congressional dissatisfaction with the conduct of the war had compelled Madison to restructure his cabinet. The failures of the Canadian campaigns required hasty improvisations to raise and train new forces for the spring and summer of 1813. And the successes of the navy dictated a greater expansion of its forces⁠&mdash;both for the Great Lakes and the Atlantic Ocean⁠&mdash;to an extent that president and his Republican allies only grudgingly conceded. All of this would require significant increases in spending, but Congress balked at imposing taxes, even though it had pledged in 1812 that taxation would be required in a state of war. But over the winter of 1812⁠–⁠13, Congress did no more than double the duties on imported goods, an expedient that irritated the nation’s mercantile communities. Despite these difficulties Madison had won re-election in November 1812, albeit with a reduced majority from his success in 1808. However, his critics, in his own party and in the Federalist opposition, were now more numerous and more vociferous than they had been in 1812. The next session of Congress, which Madison had already summoned for a spring meeting to address the needs of the Treasury, promised to be the most difficult the president had ever faced.</p>
			<p>For all these reasons, Madison’s second inaugural was a short document, barely 1500 words, and it concealed more than it revealed. The president’s immediate problem was: how to justify continuing a war under such unpromising circumstances and how might the United State emerge victorious? There is no evidence that Madison ever considered ending the war; his goal remained to obtain a peace treaty that addressed all the grievances he had outlined in June 1812. But after Great Britain had lifted the Orders in Council, attention had to be focused on the next most serious grievance⁠&mdash;the impressment of American seamen by the Royal Navy on the high seas. This had long been an intractable dispute that had not even been the subject of serious discussions since 1808. At one point, Madison had contemplated that Great Britain and the United States might agree to forego the employment of their nationals in their respective merchant marines, but Great Britain would never accept this and the policy would have seriously harmed the expansion of American commerce. Even so, in February 1813 the president revived this proposal and called upon Congress to turn it into law in order to provide a firmer basis of support for the war.</p>
			<p>The so-called Seamen’s Bill had passed Congress by the end of February 1813, but it hardly accomplished Madison’s goals. Certainly, many of the Federalists, all of whom had voted against war in June 1812, supported the bill, but a larger number of Republicans, including several of the strongest supporters of the war, voted against it. Their reason was that by seeming to accept in advance Great Britain’s claims that the United States should neither naturalize British subjects nor employ them on American vessels, the administration had made too great a concession to British doctrines about citizenship and sovereignty. Nevertheless, much of Madison’s second inaugural was devoted to justifying the war on the grounds that it was essential to protect all American mariners from impressment, regardless of their country of origin, and particularly to safeguard British subjects who had enlisted in the American armed forces and become prisoners of war from the threat of treason trials. Otherwise, the address said little else about the grievances Madison had cited in his 1 June 1812 message. He withdrew, to some extent, his charge that the British in Canada had incited Native Americans in the Northwest to wage war on the frontiers, and instead criticized the enemy for accepting the services of such “savage” allies. And about the possibility of a war with France, Madison said nothing at all.</p>
			<p>As Madison delivered this address, many in his audience must have suspected that Great Britain would not agree to a peace based on the Seamen’s Bill. But Madison had withheld one piece of information that he believed might make a treaty possible. In September 1812, Alexander I of Russia had offered to mediate in the war between Great Britain and the United States. The emperor was allied to Great Britain in the war against France, but he also strongly sympathized with the United States in its rejection of British doctrines about maritime and neutral rights. The Russian offer had reached Washington by the end of February 1813, but Madison did not announce that he would accept it until 8 March 1813. He may have even concluded that Great Britain would accept the Russian offer. The prospect of Russian diplomatic support against Great Britain, even as French power in Europe declined, was one reason why Madison decided that the War of 1812 should be continued. Details of his other ideas about how the war might be waged were left until the first session of the Thirteenth Congress assembled in Washington on 24 May 1813.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
