<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 48</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-48" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of Ulysses S. Grant</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Joan Waugh</h3>
			<p>Thursday, March 4, 1868 dawned cold and cloudy. Citizens had already been pouring into Washington, D.C. to witness the inauguration ceremony of the 18th president of the United States, Republican Ulysses S. Grant. The crowds viewed a parade featuring thousands of marching soldiers and despite the weather, were in a festive mood. Roughly 50,000 citizens gathered at noon to watch Chief Justice Salmon Chase administer the oath of office to the 43-year-old Grant on the east portico of the Capitol building. Unaccustomed to public speaking, President Grant read his brief handwritten speech of 1,127 words to the expectant crowd, who strained to hear his softly spoken words. Grant’s famous campaign slogan, “Let Us Have Peace,” which stated his desire for the country’s peaceful reconciliation and promised to help secure it “calmly, without prejudice, hate or sectional pride.” While offering the olive branch to the ex-Confederates, General, now President Grant, also made plain that the United States’ victory in the Civil War was to be secured on <em>Northern</em> terms. That meant restoring the rights and privileges of citizenship of white southerners, but also protecting the rights and establishing the citizenship of the freed people. He affirmed, “This requires security of person, property, and free religious and political opinion in every part of our common country, without regard to local prejudice,” adding, “All laws to secure these ends will receive my best efforts for their enforcement.”</p>
			<p>Indeed, 1868 was the first presidential campaign in which the issues of Reconstruction predominated, mirroring an intense debate among Americans over the struggle for the meaning of the Civil War: was it primarily about saving the Union with a focus on restoring white harmony or was it about ensuring the fruits of emancipation and racial justice? Could both be accommodated? After briefly mentioning his other major goals for the country&mdash;building a prosperous economy, paying down the war debt, accomplishing Indian reform, earning prestige on the international stage, and passing the Fifteenth Amendment that would grant suffrage for black men&mdash;Grant made his case for healing the bitterness of wartime animosities. He began this part of his speech by asserting, “The country having just emerged from a great rebellion, many questions will come before it for settlement in the next four years which preceding Administrations have never had to deal with,” then calling for all citizens to meet those questions, “calmly, without prejudice, hate or sectional pride, remembering that the greatest good to the greatest number is the object to be attained.”</p>
			<p>More prosaic than poetic, Grant’s first inaugural address offered a clear and pleasing pledge to reunify the broken nation inspired by the principles of Abraham Lincoln’s Republican Party&mdash;Union, free labor for all, economic progress, and American security abroad. Neither the press nor the people expected the “silent” general to suddenly emerge as a great orator, yet praise for the address was nearly universal, the <i>New York Times</i> declaring that Grant “said it strongly and well.” The newly sworn in president might have assumed that he had a mandate from northern voters to rise above politics to heal the country. Yet his inaugural remarks indicate that he expected to meet some resistance. A brief examination of the contest that preceded the inaugural festivities will shed light on the challenges beyond the election.</p>
			<p>The search for a Republican candidate took place against the backdrop of President Andrew Johnson’s impeachment trial. In February 1868 The House of Representatives voted to impeach the nominally Republican Johnson, failing by one vote to win the necessary Senate majority needed for removal. Moderate Republicans thus gained traction over the selection process as the Party prepared for the 1868 presidential election. Worried that none of the current crop of politicians held the national stature to secure the nomination, Republican leaders turned to the popular Union hero Grant. As general, he planned and executed military campaigns, presided over occupation of the southern population and territory, and formulated and implemented polices and practices that constituted wartime reconstruction. After the Appomattox surrender, he remained a powerful presence serving as general-in-chief and overseeing the military part of reconstruction policy for President Johnson. He, perhaps as much as anyone in the United States, had an investment in helping to establish a permanent and solid peace between North and South.</p>
			<p>The majority of Republicans viewed Grant as a solid moderate. He had backed congressional reconstruction without embracing radical proposals of land redistribution or immediate social equality between the races, although he pledged support for both the Fourteenth (passed 1866, ratified 1868) and Fifteenth amendments. The fact that he was not a career politician did not seem to matter. In fact, it might have been a plus to the voter, part of the generation who lived through a period of extraordinary political turmoil. No ordinary candidate exuded the strength, the authority, and the power of Grant; no other candidate held the reputation or the successes. No other candidate’s legacy was more at stake. He was the obvious, inevitable choice for the Republican Party.</p>
			<p>The ensuing Republican campaign and its candidate sought to unify a divided, diverse country around the symbols of nationhood&mdash;the Founding Fathers, the flag, religion, economic opportunity, and above all, the shared sacrifice of the Civil War. Following tradition, Grant stayed at his home in Galena, Illinois, where he received groups of supporters. A few years later, he described the stakes for the 1868 campaign: “I believed that if a democratic president was elected there would be little chance for those who fought for the Union.” The Democratic Party accused the Republicans&mdash;“the Radical party”&mdash;of violating the constitutional rights of the Southern states and of subjecting them to “military despotism.” Their Democratic platform, while accepting emancipation, blamed Republicans of planning to elevate the interests of the freed people above those of the white population. Party leaders, such as their presidential candidate, Horatio Seymour of New York, attacked Grant as an uncouth, simple-minded, unprincipled, “Negro-loving” tyrant. As Republicans marched in parades, Democrats taunted them with signs proclaiming: “Grant the Butcher,” and “Grant the Drunkard,” the latter referring to his alleged weakness for alcohol.</p>
			<p>The Republicans returned fire, but highlighted a positive message, emphasizing their role as the Party that saved the Union, freed the slaves, and was peacefully reforming the South. Republican operatives in the former Confederate states targeted enfranchised freedmen with educative political pamphlets, provided black and white speakers with “Grant badges” to distribute, started political clubs, and organized barbecues, and other political entertainments. Violence entered directly into electoral politics with white supremacists launching terrorist attacks in every Southern state. Houses, churches, schools, printing offices, political clubrooms were attacked and sometimes destroyed. The lame-duck Johnson administration did nothing to stop this terror in which hundreds of black and white Republicans were killed.</p>
			<p>When election day, November 3, arrived and the votes were tabulated, Grant scored a comfortable, but not a smashing, victory in the popular vote, 53% to Seymour’s 47%, while winning by a landslide in the electoral college, 214 to 80.The majority of electoral votes (157) came from states free of slavery before the Civil War; (Seymour carried just 3 of them), and 78% of the electorate participated, including for the first time in American history, an estimated 400,000⁠–&ndash;500,000 Black men.</p>
			<p>No man other than George Washington came to the office with such high expectations as those that accompanied Ulysses S. Grant to his swearing-in ceremonies. Some Democrats worried aloud that Grant’s election meant that “militarism” would dominate government policy, but most Republicans thought his victory meant redemption for the Union Cause for which so many had fought and died and sacrificed for since 1861. They would agree with the judgment offered up by the influential journal <i>Harper’s Weekly</i> describing the election as the “final interpretation of the war.”</p>
			<p>Ulysses S. Grant’s first inaugural speech prepared the country for his coming administration. He, and it, would be charged with, and judged by, implementing the Republican-dominated, interracial governments already present in most of the ex-Confederate States. Concluding, President Grant asked for a “patient forbearance one towards another throughout the land, and a determined effort on the part of every citizen to do his share towards cementing a happy union,” adding, “and I ask the prayers of the nation to Almighty God in behalf of this consummation.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
