<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Schoolmaster: The First Inaugural Address of Woodrow Wilson: by Robert A. Enholm</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-72" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Schoolmaster: The First Inaugural Address of Woodrow Wilson</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Robert A. Enholm</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Woodrow Wilson is the most consequential American president in the period between Abraham Lincoln and Franklin D. Roosevelt.</p>
			<p>Why should we reexamine President Woodrow Wilson’s first inaugural address? Why do we study history at all? Is it to help explain how we got to the present? Is it to help us understand human nature? Is it to expand our range of experiences and help us to imagine the possibilities of our lives and of society?</p>
			<p>In fact, events and personalities from history are constantly reevaluated and reinterpreted in light of prevailing concerns and understandings. Thus one cannot discuss President Woodrow Wilson today without acknowledging that he has become a symbol of the white supremacy that prevailed in and deﬁned his era. A consideration of Wilson’s first inaugural address written ten years ago might not have mentioned his racism, and one written in the future might ﬁnd another point about Wilson’s life to highlight.</p>
			<p>So, what are we to say about Woodrow Wilson? In what ways was he merely emblematic of his times? What ideas did he advance that constituted what we today might call “progress”? What events from his biography surprise us or cause us to reconsider our opinion of him or even to reconsider our opinions about ourselves?</p>
			<p>Perhaps what history provides is context. Nearly a century after Wilson’s death in 1923, our world is very diﬀerent from his own. How did his thinking and his decisions aﬀect us for good and ill? How did he, raised as a child during the American Civil War, grow to understand and address the changing world he inhabited? How do we grow to understand and address our changing world? In reading his first inaugural address, what can we see there, what is missing, and what can we learn?</p>
			<p>Before turning to Woodrow Wilson’s first inaugural address, a brief biography will provide some perspective. Wilson was born in 1856 in Staunton, Virginia, and raised during the American Civil War and Reconstruction Period in Augusta, Georgia and Columbia, South Carolina. Wilson was the son, grandson, son-in-law, and nephew of Presbyterian ministers and theologians. Unique among American presidents, all four of his grandparents were born outside of the United States. His ancestors were Scottish, English, and Irish.</p>
			<p>Wilson attended college for a year at Davidson College, in North Carolina, before transferring to the College of New Jersey (later to become Princeton University). Wilson studied law at the University of Virginia and received his master’s degree and PhD at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. After teaching brieﬂy at Bryn Mawr College (in Pennsylvania) and Wesleyan University (in Connecticut), he joined the faculty at Princeton University in 1890, where he would spend the rest of his academic career. Wilson was considered an excellent orator and was a prominent and popular professor at Princeton. In 1902 he became Princeton’s President.</p>
			<p>As Wilson was wrapping up his graduate academic work, in 1885 he married Ellen Axson. Sadly, she would die of kidney disease as First Lady in the White House in 1914. They had three daughters born in the 1890s.</p>
			<p>Wilson’s rise in politics was as improbable as it was unprecedented. He went from university president in 1910, to Governor of New Jersey, for two years, to election as President of the United States in 1912. William Jennings Bryan had been the Democratic Party nominee in three of the four most recent presidential elections. At the 1912 Democratic Party Convention, Wilson did not receive the nomination until the 46th ballot. Bryan eventually supported Wilson at the Convention and was appointed Secretary of State in Wilson’s initial cabinet.</p>
			<p>The 1912 Presidential Election was one of the wildest and most unusual in American history. Wilson competed against William Howard Taft, the incumbent President, Theodore Roosevelt, the former President, and Eugene V. Debs, the perennial Socialist Party candidate. Wilson won an Electoral College landslide (435 out of 531) with only 42% of the popular vote. Wilson won because he was well-spoken, a novel ﬁgure in American politics, a Northern governor with Southern roots, and he supported policies that were progressive for his time.</p>
			<p>Wilson was the ﬁrst Democrat elected president since Grover Cleveland in 1892 and was the ﬁrst Southern-born president since the Civil War. He was (and remains) the only president to have earned a PhD. In the 1912 election, as Wilson mentions in his first inaugural address, his Democratic Party retained control of the House of Representatives and gained control of the Senate. When Wilson took oﬃce in 1913, there were several Civil War veterans (Union and Confederate) in the Congress.</p>
			<p>Reexamining President Woodrow Wilson’s first inaugural address today, we notice several things. First, he uses his lofty oratory to elevate our thinking. The hallmark of Woodrow Wilson’s rhetoric was his exhortation to great ideals and his invocation of universal principles. Wilson begins by acknowledging the success of the Democratic Party, but he immediately pivots to say that his aims transcend partisanship and serve national goals, even humanity itself. “The success of a party means little except when the Nation is using that party for a large and deﬁnite purpose.” The invocation of higher principles is, of course, seen later in Wilson’s speeches in support of the League of Nations. At his First Inauguration, he exclaims, “This is not a day of triumph; it is a day of dedication. Here muster, not the forces of party, but the force of humanity.”</p>
			<p>Second, Wilson sets forth a list of practical goals that he intends to achieve. Sometimes in history, the most remarkable innovations are accepted and become so ordinary that the innovation becomes obscured. This may be true of Wilson’s exercise of presidential leadership. He consciously brings to Congress an agenda of desired actions. In his speech, he alludes disparagingly to the tariﬀ system which underpinned the ﬁnances of the federal government. The Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution had recently been ratiﬁed (after the November election and before the March Inauguration), enabling a reduction in tariﬀs whose revenue to support the federal government would be replaced by revenue from a newly approved progressive federal income tax. The tariﬀ reduction would help the economy and the burden of a progressive tax would be carried principally by the wealthy. The Revenue Act of 1913 was Wilson’s ﬁrst order of business for the new Congress, and its passage fulﬁlled a long-held wish of progressive Democrats.</p>
			<p>Similarly, Wilson disparaged the current “banking and credit system,” and before the end of his ﬁrst year in oﬃce, Wilson would push through Congress the Federal Reserve Act, which established a national bank in the United States for the ﬁrst time in over seventy years. The Federal Reserve System remains the foundation of the American banking system today.</p>
			<p>In his inaugural address, Wilson also targets the “industrial system,” and during his ﬁrst term as president, Wilson oversaw the passage of both the Clayton Antitrust Act and the Federal Trade Commission Act to strengthen federal regulation of anticompetitive business practices and to help trade unions. The Federal Farm Loan Act and the National Park Service Act, both of 1916, are also anticipated in Wilson’s inaugural address. Wilson’s ﬁrst term in oﬃce achieved the greatest outpouring of progressive federal legislation until the New Deal, a generation later.</p>
			<p>The ﬁnal observation to be made about Wilson’s first inaugural address is that it is animated by progressivism, a movement in both Republican and Democratic politics in this era associated with good government, antitrust, conservation of natural resources, eﬃciency, workers’ rights, and product safety. In the progressive tradition, Wilson is not calling for revolution. He identiﬁes and criticizes short-comings of capitalism, but he reassures, “Our work is a work of restoration.” Wilson did not have the advantages of communicating by television or radio. He spoke and wrote in relatively long and complex sentences that lent themselves to being read in newspapers. The progressive spirit is evident: “There can be no equality or opportunity, the ﬁrst essential of justice in the body politic, if men and women and children be not shielded in their lives, their very vitality, from the consequences of great industrial and social processes which they can not alter, control, or singly cope with.”</p>
			<p>So, what did Woodrow Wilson overlook? A century later, we have the advantage of history to look back and see what Wilson did not say at his First Inauguration. This takes us into the realm of subjective or normative history (if there is such a realm). We can look back and consider what we think Wilson’s concerns should have been. To a great extent, we must allow ﬁgures in history to be of their own time. The broader question might be to what extent can political leaders get ahead of their people? There are many examples in history of leaders who did unpopular things and yet have come to be regarded as far-sighted. Many other leaders failed for being “ahead of their time.” What did Wilson fail to foresee?</p>
			<p>Obvious oversights by Wilson would include international issues. Today Wilson is well known for leading the United States through the First World War and thereafter for leading the establishment of the League of Nations, for which he would receive the Nobel Peace Prize for 1919. But in 1913, the thunderclap that would be the eruption of the First World War was not foreseen.</p>
			<p>Similarly, Wilson is silent about the growing Suﬀragist Movement that would lead in less than seven years, during his second term, to the adoption of the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution, securing for women the federal constitutional right to vote. Wilson came into oﬃce skeptical of the wisdom of a federal constitutional amendment on the subject. He supported state laws favoring women’s suﬀrage, and in 1915 voted as a citizen for such a law in his home state of New Jersey (it did not pass). Over the course of his presidency, seeing the sacriﬁces American women made for the war and receiving lobbying attention from suﬀragists, Wilson evolved and ultimately gave decisive support to the Nineteenth Amendment.</p>
			<p>But from a modern point of view, Wilson’s greatest oversight in his first inaugural address is his silence on the plight of Black people and the segregation and racism that prevailed in his time. We who study the Progressive Era recognize and regret that progressivism in this era did not embrace racial justice. American history includes decades of racial segregation, institutionalized racism, Jim Crow laws, and racial discrimination. Students of history may wish that President Wilson possessed and exhibited more enlightened views on race, but the historical fact is that he did not. This reveals much about him and his contemporaries.</p>
			<p>Few in 1913 America were expecting Woodrow Wilson to make progress in dismantling the white supremacy that characterized and dominated so many institutions at this time. The problem of racism was much bigger than any single President. And unfortunately, most Americans did not recognize it as a problem at all.</p>
			<p>Some modern observers will accept as suﬃcient to understand Wilson’s racism an explanation that Wilson was from the South. History commands us to see that Wilson’s unenlightened views on race were held more broadly in early 20th century America, even among educated, religious, and socially prominent people, in all regions of the country.</p>
			<p>Over the past several years, historians have drawn their attention to Woodrow Wilson, the racism of his Administration, and particularly his perpetuation of and acquiescence to segregation. That scholarship is too voluminous and fast-developing to be summarized here. The problem of racism in America challenges historians. Those who study this era do not want to suggest that they approve of the prevailing racism and do not want their writings to be interpreted as justiﬁcations for racism or apologies for those who perpetuated it. On the other hand, to speak plainly about this era is to describe a time when racial discrimination of the rankest sort, including segregation, was tolerated, accepted, and commonplace.</p>
			<p>What can be said is that Wilson did not publicly display the hostile racist animus that was exhibited by many of his contemporaries. But it is clear that Wilson acquiesced to the racist activities and segregation practices of his subordinates, including several cabinet members. Wilson, and much of America, was blind to the problem. It remains the task of historians to explain why. History can help us imagine the challenges that faced civil rights advocates in an era before “civil rights” was even broadly recognized as a term.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
