<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Preacher President: The Inaugural Address of James A. Garfield: by Charles W. Calhoun</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-54" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Preacher President: The Inaugural Address of James A. Garfield</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Charles W. Calhoun</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>When the Republican Party tapped James A. Garfield for president in 1880, observers labeled him a dark horse nominee, but he had long occupied a place in the front rank of American politicians. Through seventeen years in Congress, he had positioned himself as an eloquent advocate of Republican doctrine, and, not unreasonably, he anticipated that a deadlocked national convention might turn to him. He was right. A prolonged struggle between supporters of former president Ulysses S. Grant and those of Maine Senator James G. Blaine ended when Blaine delegates swung to Garfield. Eventually, the party closed ranks, and he went on to victory in November. He was the only Republican from 1876 to 1892 to win a popular-vote plurality over his Democratic opponent.</p>
			<p>Few presidents have approached preparing an inaugural with greater intellectual strengths than Garfield’s. Educated at Williams College, he had been a professor of ancient languages, ordained minister, college president, lawyer, and Ohio state senator⁠–⁠all before he turned thirty, at which age he became a general in the United States army. A scholar in politics, he carried on a lively correspondence with professors, literary figures, and leading political economists. He labored long hours researching and writing his speeches and essays, taking breaks to read his favorite Roman poets in Latin.</p>
			<p>It is remarkable, then, that when Garfield set about writing his address, he fell into an almost crippling hesitation. After his fashion, he launched the task by studying all his predecessors’ speeches, but as weeks went by, his usual scholarly self-discipline abandoned him. He put no words to paper and allowed himself to be distracted by tedious consultations regarding patronage and other political matters. His procrastination was not entirely out of character, for at key points in his career Garfield had suffered spasms of indecision. Rather than being inspired by previous inaugural addresses, he considered them, except for Lincoln’s, “dreary reading,” and feared that “mine will be also.” Daunted by the responsibility of framing the most important utterance of his life, he grumbled that the inaugural genre had “so many limitations” that it left “little freedom in its composition.” More than once, he considered giving no address at all. Three days before the inauguration, he finally had a draft but was “so much dissatisfied with it” that he started all over again. He did not complete the speech until 2:30 in the morning of March 4, 1881, the day of its delivery.</p>
			<p>In the end, Garfield fell back on a personal model for his address⁠–⁠the public letter he had issued accepting the Republican presidential nomination. In that campaign letter he had discussed the central issues confronting the American people, and he now reprised those questions in roughly the same order. He aimed to cultivate favor with both the Grant wing of his party, which emphasized continued support for civil rights, and the Blaine wing, which stressed economic issues. Eschewing high-flown rhetoric, he presented a clear exposition of the state of the Republic and where he wanted to take it.</p>
			<p>Garfield began his address with a reverent yet monitory review of the Republic’s progress through the previous century. At the outset, he observed, the American Revolution represented not merely a violent withdrawal from the British Empire but the initiation of a “great experiment of self-government,” which formed the new nation’s quintessence. The American revolutionaries defied not only “the armies of a great nation,” but also “the settled opinions of mankind” in battling for the radical principle that “the supreme authority of government could be safely intrusted to the guardianship of the people themselves.” After a halting start, the Articles of Confederation gave way to the Constitution, establishing “a National Union, founded directly upon the will of the people.” Yet, despite the nation’s growth and success, doubts about the durability of its democratic project persisted, until the Civil War brought “the supreme trial of the Constitution.”</p>
			<p>Although the war’s outcome secured the Union’s permanency, sixteen years after Appomattox, American democracy still remained contested. Garfield expressed the anxiety felt by many citizens, especially Republicans, that the nation could not finally secure the promise of the Founders’ design as long as it was held hostage by men who placed white supremacy above admitting Blacks to participate in self-government. “There can be no permanent disfranchised peasantry in the United States,” he declared. “To violate the freedom and sanctities of the suffrage is more than an evil. It is a crime which, if persisted in, will destroy the Government itself. Suicide is not a remedy.”</p>
			<p>Still, Garfield suggested no revival of military Reconstruction, which neither Congress nor the nation would sanction. Conceding the validity of complaints about the ignorance of Black voters, he favored not denying them suffrage but instead improving their capacity for citizenship by a thorough program of education. But, he said, the problem of voter ignorance extended beyond the South. Decrying a rising “tide of illiteracy” in the country, he called for “all the constitutional power of the nation and of the States” to “meet this danger by the savory influence of universal education.” Again, he stressed the precariousness of the democratic experiment, warning that if the next “generation comes to its inheritance blinded by ignorance and corrupted by vice, the fall of the Republic will be certain and remediless.”</p>
			<p>Turning to economic questions, Garfield hailed the nation’s prosperity after a half-decade of depression in the 1870s. He attributed the good fortune not only to bountiful harvests but also to government policies for the preservation of the public credit and the resumption of the payment of specie for greenback paper dollars issued during the Civil War. Subscribing to prevailing financial orthodoxy, he saw gold and silver as the “only safe foundation for a monetary system.” Paper notes such as the greenbacks were only “promises to pay money” and must be held at par with specie. Like gold, silver possessed intrinsic value, but its safe use as money depended on its coinage in equivalence with gold, preferably at a ratio set by international agreement. Garfield also called for refinancing the national debt at a lower interest rate.</p>
			<p>As an economic nationalist, Garfield favored an expanded role for government in fostering prosperity. For farmers, he advocated programs to provide “the best lights of practical science and experience.” Over the years Garfield had shown less enthusiasm than many Republicans had displayed on behalf of a high tariff to protect American industry from foreign competition. The Republican campaign in 1880 had placed great emphasis on that policy, but Garfield omitted any specific mention of it in his address. Instead, he saluted the nation’s burgeoning manufacturers and said simply that their “steady and healthy growth should still be matured.” The vagueness of this locution in the passive voice suggested Garfield’s lingering affinity for freer trade and offered scant encouragement to his party’s protectionist wing.</p>
			<p>In the interest of expanding trade, Garfield advocated the improvement of harbors and interior waterways and support to revitalize the American merchant fleet. He also favored further consideration of plans for a Central American ship canal and asserted that any such waterway should remain under American “supervision and authority.”</p>
			<p>Since its first national platform in 1856, the Republican Party had decried polygamy, condemning it, like slavery, as a “relic of barbarism.” This issue centered in the Utah Territory, where adherents to the Mormon Church predominated. Garfield acknowledged the Constitution’s guarantee of “absolute religious freedom,” but he asserted that Congress had the duty to prohibit in areas under its jurisdiction “all criminal practices,” especially those that “destroy the family relations and endanger social order.” Again he warned of danger to America’s democratic experiment, denouncing the Mormon Church’s exclusionary political practices in the territory. No “ecclesiastical organization,” he insisted, could “be safely permitted to usurp in the smallest degree the functions and powers of the National Government.”</p>
			<p>Finally, Garfield turned to civil service reform, an issue that had roiled politics for more than a decade. President Grant had first instituted a reform program in the early 1870s, but Congress had never confirmed it through legislation. Without statute law, Garfield argued, the civil service could “never be placed on a satisfactory basis.” But he did not call for a legislated mandate for competitive exams for appointments. Instead, he promised to ask Congress to prescribe the term-lengths for minor offices as well as the grounds for legitimate dismissal, thus hoping to protect upright civil servants from arbitrary removal for political reasons. As matters turned out, the most significant achievement of Garfield’s brief term came with his successful assertion of the power of the president to appoint officials despite the objection of state party bosses.</p>
			<p>Though hardly a masterpiece, Garfield’s address won general praise. One Republican newspaper said his “admirable” speech justified the people’s “high confidence” in him. Yet, the paper added, “it still remains for him to show whether he possesses the rare tact, the patience, and the practical statesmanship to get things done.”</p>
			<p>Four months later an assassin’s bullet denied him the chance.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
