<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Last Whig: Millard Fillmore’s Announcement to Congress of the Death of President Taylor: by Claude Welch</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-36" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Last Whig: Millard Fillmore’s Announcement to Congress of the Death of President Taylor</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Claude Welch</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Rankings of American Presidents generally place Millard Fillmore towards the bottom. Critics consider his approval of the Compromise of 1850 a major flaw. In fairness to him, we must recognize the delicate balance struck in this legislation. The most infamous part, the Fugitive Slave Act, formed part of a broader package of five bills. The Compromise temporarily defused a political confrontation between slave and free states that had existed since the republic’s establishment. On the positive side, various bills in the Compromise abolished slavery in the District of Columbia. California, Texas, and other states or territories acquired during the Mexican–American War became full-fledged states. Arguably, four positive actions, one negative.</p>
			<p>Fillmore, a largely self-educated individual, prized cautious, lawyerly, and above all, constitutionally sanctioned actions. He had assumed the presidency upon the death of his successor, Zachary Taylor. On July 10, 1850, Fillmore delivered a short address acknowledging Taylor, which offered no insight into how he would govern as president. This became clearer nearly half a year later when he delivered his <a href="https://millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/december-2-1850-first-annual-message">first major address to Congress on December 2, 1850</a> (quoted throughout). Fillmore, the 13th President, remained in the Presidency for two years and 37 days.</p>
			<p>A political chasm existed between Taylor and Fillmore, Fillmore having been selected largely for geographic balance. Neither gave remarks filled with quotable material, unlike other presidents. Fillmore’s speech was ponderous, filled with long, complex sentences. Consider the following. “I trust, therefore, that it may not be deemed inappropriate if I avail myself of this opportunity of the reassembling of Congress to make known my sentiments in a general manner in regard to the policy which ought to be pursued by the Government both in its intercourse with foreign nations and its management and administration of internal affairs.”</p>
			<p>Fillmore broke with the expansionist policies of James K. Polk, saying, “We make no wars to promote or to prevent successions to thrones, to maintain any theory of a balance of power, or to suppress the actual government which any country chooses to establish for itself.” In his first annual address to Congress, Fillmore also praised the treaty reached by the United States with Great Britain, “facilitating and protecting the construction of a ship canal between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans and for other purposes.” No, the passageway would not be located across the Isthmus of Panama, but across Nicaragua. On the other hand, Fillmore subsequently authorized Commodore Matthew Perry’s 1853 expedition to Japan, a clear exercise in gunboat diplomacy.</p>
			<p>The 13th President personally opposed slavery. However, as Chief Executive, he believed himself bound to support the “peculiar institution.” As he stated, “In our domestic policy the Constitution will be my guide, and in questions of doubt I shall look for its interpretation to the judicial decisions of that tribunal which was established to expound it and to the usage of the Government, sanctioned by the acquiescence of the country.” Further, Fillmore pledged to “deprecate useless irritation among the several members of the Union and all reproach and crimination tending to alienate one portion of the country from another.” Implicitly, he showed himself willing to remain within the broad tradition demonstrated by the renowned Whig leader Daniel Webster. According to Fillmore, “without law there can be no real practical liberty; that when law is trampled under foot tyranny rules, whether it appears in the form of a military despotism or of popular violence.”</p>
			<p>The infamous Dred Scott decision followed seven years later.</p>
			<p>Fillmore was the last of the Whig Presidents, having been preceded by the aforementioned Harrison and Zachary Taylor. In terms of internal policy, the Whigs favored high tariffs to protect nascent domestic industries. As Fillmore stated, “All experience has demonstrated the wisdom and policy of raising a large portion of revenue for the support of Government from duties on goods imported. The power to lay these duties is unquestionable, and its chief object, of course, is to replenish the Treasury. But if in doing this an incidental advantage may be gained by encouraging the industry of our own citizens, it is our duty to avail ourselves of that advantage.”</p>
			<p>Fillmore foreshadowed the 1862 creation of the Department of Agriculture, proposing “the establishment of an agricultural bureau, to be charged with the duty of giving to this leading branch of American industry the encouragement which it so well deserves.” He also recommended, “the employment of a competent mineralogist and chemist … [who would analyze] their respective elements and properties and their adaptation to useful purposes … and examine and report upon the qualities of different soils and the manures best calculated to improve their productiveness.” Fillmore further echoed Taylor’s 1848 recommendation to open “’a line of communication, the best and most expeditious of which the nature of the country will admit,’ between the Valley of the Mississippi and the Pacific.”</p>
			<p>The Mexican-American war resulted in the incorporation of numerous Native Americans. Fillmore alluded to this dramatic change thus: “Texas and New Mexico are surrounded by powerful tribes of Indians, who are a source of constant terror and annoyance to the inhabitants. Separating into small predatory bands, and always mounted, they overrun the country, devastating farms, destroying crops, driving off whole herds of cattle, and occasionally murdering the inhabitants or carrying them into captivity.”</p>
			<p>Internationally, Fillmore stressed facilitating imports of guano! “Peruvian guano has become so desirable an article to the agricultural interest of the United States that it is the duty of the Government to employ all the means properly in its power for the purpose of causing that article to be imported into the country at a reasonable price.” He called upon Spain and Great Britain to settle their boundary dispute in Hispaniola, which he called ‘St. Domingo’. “The proximity of that island to the United States and the delicate questions involved in the existing controversy there render it desirable that it should be permanently and speedily adjusted.”</p>
			<p>Fillmore concluded his address with a final plea for reason. In his view. “It was hardly to have been expected that the series of measures passed at your last session with the view of healing the sectional differences which had sprung from the slavery and territorial questions should at once have realized their beneficent purpose. All mutual concession in the nature of a compromise must necessarily be unwelcome to men of extreme opinions.”</p>
			<p>What lessons can one draw from this brief analysis of a single speech?</p>
			<p>First, Fillmore saw his role as Chief Executive as one constrained by the Constitution, Acts of Congress, and major judicial decisions. As a largely self-educated lawyer who had received little formal schooling, he firmly defended the constraints imposed by the other branches of government.</p>
			<p>Fillmore likewise did not stray from Whig orthodoxy. His support for significant domestic infrastructure improvements and industrial development, funded by tariff walls, remained constant. He thirdly viewed America's international role as largely an outgrowth of domestic policies, as witness the stress upon guano imports or his concern about Hispaniola, where boundary disputes threatened <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> interests.</p>
			<p>Finally, and most significant in the view of later historians, Fillmore “failed” largely due to one of the five bills contained in the Compromise of 1850. I would advance a contrary view, despite the fact that millions of slaves continued to experience the travails of the “peculiar institution” for several years more. During the interim between the Compromise and the outburst of the Civil War, the North’s industrial strength and population dominance grew. It entered the conflict even stronger than its Confederate adversary. Did the objective—additional years of peace—justify the means? That is a question readers of this chapter, and other parts of the publication, must weigh for every President. What they said in their inaugural addresses should be judged in terms of the words of the various Chief Executives relative to their subsequent records and to the verdict rendered later by history.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
