<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 32</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of James K. Polk</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Walter R. Borneman</h3>
			<p>The America of the 1840s flexed its expansionist muscles. Railroads spread out from east coast cities. Steamboats plied the Mississippi River and its tributaries. Beyond the Mississippi, the western half of the continent beckoned. To many Americans, coming out of the country’s worst depression to date (the Panic of 1837), the wide-open lands of the West—though partially occupied by Native Americans, Mexican nationals, and British subjects—offered a relief valve and the hope of better times.</p>
			<p>Settlers poured into the newly independent Republic of Texas; wagon trains rolled up the Platte River toward the Oregon country; and a few opportunists poked around the Mexican province of California. John Tyler, having become president upon the death of William Henry Harrison in 1841, wanted a term of his own but found little support from anyone.</p>
			<p>Expansionist fervor aside, the two leading candidates for their party’s 1844 nominations, Henry Clay of the Whigs and Martin Van Buren of the Democrats, publicly stated that the annexation of Texas favored by Tyler might lead to war with Mexico and should not be undertaken. Andrew Jackson, hero of the battle of New Orleans and occupant of the White House for two tumultuous terms, became furious. Jackson felt betrayed by Van Buren, his vice president whom he had championed to succeed him in 1836.</p>
			<p>Jackson summoned another protégé, James K. Polk, a former seven-term congressman, speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives, and governor of Tennessee. Jackson had long coveted Texas, but despite characterizations as a saber rattler, he had never taken affirmative steps to bring it into the union. Now, in the final year of his life, “Old Hickory” lectured Polk that he must win the presidency and accomplish the task.</p>
			<p>It took Polk nine ballots and ample political arm-twisting to win the Democratic nomination in Baltimore. Despite the Whigs’ dismissive chant of “Who is James K. Polk?” Polk’s credentials made him one of the most seasoned and informed politicians of the era. A “dark horse” he definitely was not. In part to counter Henry Clay’s one-term pledge, but also to coalesce support among Democratic contenders who could look to their own chances four years hence, Polk pledged to be a one-term president. Whatever his goals, he would accomplish them in four years.</p>
			<p>It proved a tight electoral contest. But for 5,000 votes in New York State, Henry Clay would have given the inaugural address that James. K. Polk delivered on March 4, 1845. Clay would have focused on federally funded internal improvements, extended an olive branch toward Mexico and Great Britain in foreign affairs, and, to the extent possible, toned down the drumbeat of westward expansion.</p>
			<p>Polk’s vision was more sweeping. According to Polk’s secretary of the navy and would-be biographer, George Bancroft, Polk summarized his inaugural address when he confided to Bancroft “the four great measures” of his administration. First, the joint occupation of Oregon with Great Britain had to be settled; second, the American continent must be rounded out by the acquisition of California from Mexico; third, the protectionist tariff burdening southern states had to be reduced to a revenue basis; and lastly, an independent treasury had to be established.</p>
			<p>But what about Texas?  Lame duck president John Tyler was as much in favor of acquiring Texas as Andrew Jackson and James K. Polk. After considerable intrigue and political maneuvering, on the last full day of his administration Tyler dispatched a message to all Texans that the United States stood ready and willing to admit the Lone Star Republic into the Union as the twenty-eighth state. Tyler didn’t wait for his successor to make good on Texas.</p>
			<p>Rather than being surprised or upset by Tyler’s last-minute act, Polk embraced it as he stepped to the podium to deliver his inaugural address. Even if Texas had not yet assented, the new president left no doubt about his view of its status to the United States. Polk counted the number of states at twenty-eight and noted “two of these”—referring to Florida and Texas—“have taken their position as members…within the last week.”</p>
			<p>Before embracing Texas, Polk acknowledged his relative youth and professed to be “honored with this distinguished consideration [the presidency] at an earlier period of life than any of my predecessors.” He also gave strong measure to his model of constitutional government. It would be his “first care” to administer the government in the spirit of the Constitution, and he urged “strict adherence to the clearly granted powers” and abstention from the exercise of any “doubtful or unauthorized implied powers.”</p>
			<p>If there were those who viewed him as a southerner first, Polk left no doubt that he was cut from Old Hickory’s cloth. “Every lover of his country must shudder at the thought of the possibility of its dissolution,” the Young Hickory proclaimed, “and will be ready to adopt the patriotic sentiment, ‘Our Federal Union—it must be preserved.’”</p>
			<p>Polk further declared, “All citizens, whether native or adopted, are placed upon terms of precise equality. All are entitled to equal rights and equal protection.” Yet, in espousing this Jacksonian triumph of the common man, Polk failed to count the slaves he owned among that number.</p>
			<p>Indeed, Polk defended the institution of slavery without mentioning it by name. “It is a source of deep regret,” Polk continued, “that in some sections of our country misguided persons have occasionally indulged in schemes and agitations whose object is the destruction of domestic institutions existing in other sections—institutions which existed at the adoption of the Constitution and were recognized and protected by it.”</p>
			<p>Polk’s other domestic views were consistent with his “four great measures” and the planks of the Democratic Platform. “We need no national banks,” he said, or federal involvement in internal improvements. And almost verbatim, Polk repeated the careful wording of his tariff letter during the campaign—“a tariff for revenue” with just enough incidental protection to appease the North.</p>
			<p>The second half of Polk’s inaugural was devoted to foreign affairs, expansionist affairs, one concludes. Even as the Constitution did not “force reform on the States” in Polk’s view, it had entrusted “the exclusive management of our foreign affairs” to the federal government. His prior words about implied powers aside, Polk would make the most of it.</p>
			<p>He espoused long-stated but dubious annexationist views that Texas had once been “a part of our country.” It had been “unwisely ceded away to a foreign power,” but was now independent and had the sovereign right to become a state. Congratulating neither Tyler nor Congress, Polk instead chose to congratulate “my country” that Texas was finally on the road to reunion.</p>
			<p>Polk went on to warn that the question of annexation belonged exclusively between the United States and Texas. It was not the concern of Great Britain or France, and it was certainly not the concern of Mexico. Polk asserted that he would act just as dutifully against Great Britain to maintain the right of the United States to the whole of Oregon as he would against Mexico vis-a-vis Texas.</p>
			<p>With the British ambassador in the crowd, Polk repeated the pledge of the Democratic platform: “Our title to the country of the Oregon is ‘clear and unquestionable,’ and already are our people preparing to perfect that title by occupying it with their wives and children.” This was no military operation, Polk maintained, but “the peaceful triumphs of the industry of our emigrants.” And to us, the president concluded, “belongs the duty of protecting them adequately wherever they may be upon our soil.”</p>
			<p>With that, cannon thundered and the rain-soaked crowd escorted the Polks down Pennsylvania Avenue to a reception at the White House. James was forty-nine, the youngest person yet to assume the presidency and a full decade younger than the average age of his predecessors. His wife, Sarah, was forty-one. Together they made a striking and energetic couple who signaled the passing of the torch to the next generation in a way that would not again reverberate so sharply until 1961.</p>
			<p>James K. Polk did not hesitate in the coming four years to expand the powers of the presidency—particularly infringing on Congress’s right to declare war—to extend the Texas border, push the British out of Oregon, and wrestle California and what became the states of the American Southwest from Mexico. He accomplished his goals and died within months of completing his one term.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
