<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 18</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Second Inaugural Address of James Monroe</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Sandra Moats</h3>
			<p>James Monroe’s second inauguration as president in 1821 proved to be unusual in several respects.  With the congressionally mandated date of March 4th falling on a Sunday, Monroe delayed his inauguration until Monday March 5 in deference to religious observances. (The inaugurations of 1849, 1877, and 1917 also occurred on March 5 for the same reason.)  Monroe’s path to a second term was even more remarkable: he ran unopposed, the only president other than George Washington to enjoy such a distinction.  His lack of a presidential opponent underscored the political crossroads the nation confronted in 1820.  The once robust Federalist party no longer enjoyed a national following.  Meanwhile, younger members of Monroe’s Democratic-Republican party, lacking the stature and prominence of the founding generation, waited in the wings for their shot at the presidency.  Monroe’s second inaugural address anticipated this political watershed as he reviewed his first term accomplishments and largely avoided making bold policy pronouncements for the future.</p>
			<p>Speaking to his “Fellow Citizens,” Monroe began his inaugural address by situating his presidency within the larger context of the republican ideas and the sovereign citizens whose “confidence” made his second term possible.  He reminded his audience that the American government was “founded by the people, who possess exclusively the sovereignty.” He also honored his presidential predecessors, “whose names are so much more conspicuously identified with our Revolution.”  Instead, Monroe saw himself “as the instrument than the cause of the union.”  He renewed his commitment to the United States’ founding principles of “liberty, prosperity, and happiness.”  With the nation’s sovereign citizens entrusting Monroe with a second term as president, he believed he owed his “constituents” a “review” of the “principal occurrences” of his first term and “further explanation” of his “judgments.”  This overview guided the content and organization of his 1821 inaugural address.</p>
			<p>As Monroe discussed his first term accomplishments and their future ramifications, he emphasized foreign affairs.  He explained to his audience: “The conduct of the government . . . to foreign powers is an always an object of the highest importance to the nation.”  Other issues such as the nation’s “agriculture, commerce, manufactures, fisheries, revenue, in short, its peace, may all be affected by it.”  For this reason, “attention is therefore due to this subject” of international affairs.</p>
			<p>Of course, the most significant issue in foreign affairs was the recently concluded War of 1812 with Great Britain.  Trading disputes in the Atlantic, particularly British impressment of American sailors, provided the principal motivation for this war.  Monroe reminded his audience that “the events of that war are too recent and too deeply impressed on the memory of all to require a development from me.”  Instead, Monroe focused on the war’s hefty price tag: $120 million, as well as the lessons from the war: the need to build fortifications to defend the nation’s Atlantic coastline and to raise a navy capable of supporting and protecting these military facilities.  With these defenses being constructed, Monroe also reported that more than half of the war debt, about $67 million, had been paid.</p>
			<p>Monroe then turned his attention to the warfare occurring between Spain and its colonies in South America.  Despite the geographical proximity of these conflicts to the United States, Monroe reiterated that these disputes were “a contest between different parts of the same community” and did not concern the United States.  Instead, he renewed the nation’s longstanding commitment to neutrality, an approach that had begun with George Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation of 1793.  American neutrality emphasized friendly trading relations with all nations, even those at war, along with a steadfast avoidance of political or diplomatic alliances that would entangle the United States in unnecessary warfare.  Monroe explained how this principle worked in practice: “by this equality between the parties their public vessels have been received in our ports on the same footing; they have enjoyed an equal right to purchase and export arms, munitions of war, and every other supply . . . permitted under laws.”  Nonetheless, Monroe left open the possibility “to adopt such measures” as needed, if the warfare in South America continued.</p>
			<p>Closer to home, Monroe discussed the unauthorized invasion of Spanish Florida by a “band of adventurers” in 1817-1818.  Known officially as the First Seminole War, General Andrew Jackson had led this assault against Spanish authorities, Florida’s Seminole tribe, and even two British officers.  Despite the diplomatic embarrassment of Jackson’s escapades, his successful attack exposed Spain’s weaknesses in Florida (and elsewhere) and paved the way for the Transcontinental Treaty of 1819.  Although Monroe did not mention Jackson by name in his Inaugural Address, he did highlight the importance of the 1819 treaty: “Great confidence is entertained that the late treaty with Spain . . . has placed the relations of the two countries on a basis of permanent friendship.”  This landmark treaty resulted in the legal acquisition of Florida as well as a clarification of the nation’s western boundary along the vast Louisiana territory, acquired from France in 1803.  In 1818, the United States had also concluded a treaty with Britain affirming the northern boundary of the United States at the 49th parallel.</p>
			<p>As he discussed the state of European affairs in 1821, Monroe could not have seen that the Napoleonic Wars between Britain and France during the 1810s, as well as Spain’s attenuation as a power, would produce an important diplomatic opportunity for the United States.  Nonetheless, several years later, Monroe and his able Secretary of State, John Quincy Adams, recognized a diplomatic opportunity and issued the landmark “Monroe Doctrine” in 1823.  A bold statement of solidarity between the United States and its “sister republics” in South America, the Monroe Doctrine declared that the Western Hemisphere was closed to further European colonization.  And despite an official stance of neutrality, the United States would view any new colonial encroachments as a threat to its well-being.</p>
			<p>Although receiving much less attention than foreign affairs, Monroe’s Inaugural Address highlighted two domestic issues.  One was the economic downtown known as the Panic of 1817, in which Americans experienced the loss of jobs, homes, and lands.  To alleviate the financial burden on struggling Americans, Monroe had recommended the lowering of taxes.  The second domestic issue concerned Native Americans, and unlike other parts of the address, represented a dramatic change in policy rather than a reflection of past accomplishments.  Monroe explained: “We have treated them as independent nations, without their having any substantial pretensions to that rank.”  Instead, he recommended “the education of their children, for their instruction in the arts of husbandry [farming], and to provide sustenance for them until they could provide it themselves.”  In recommending Congress consider these proposals, Monroe was advocating what would become known as an “assimilationist” approach.  Notably absent from his discussion of domestic matters was the Missouri controversy of 1819-1820, in which this territory hoped to become the nation’s 12th slave state.  Although the Missouri Compromise of 1820 resolved this crisis, the specter of slavery threatened the delicate compromises that held the young republic together.</p>
			<p>Generally regarded as the last of the “founding father” presidents, Monroe had no obvious successor.  Although a younger generation eagerly sought the reins of power, none of them possessed the national following or stature of the nation’s first five presidents. Without a revolutionary war to fight or a republican government to build, younger politicians such as Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay and William Crawford would need to find new ways to distinguish themselves.  Not surprisingly, the election to succeed Monroe ended inconclusively, with none of the four candidates receiving enough electoral votes to be elected outright.  The 1824 election was resolved in the U.S. Congress through a compromise that resulted in John Quincy Adams, the son of a “founding father,” becoming the nation’s 6th president.  Over the next decade, a new set of political parties would be established to support a new group of politicians and a new style of politics.  As the nation inaugurated Adams on March 4, 1825, they also said goodbye to a president whose career and achievements embodied the nation’s founding era.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
