<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 80</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-80" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of Herbert Hoover</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Kendrick A. Clements</h3>
			<p>In his memoirs, written nearly twenty years after he left the White House, Herbert Hoover admitted that the inaugural address he delivered on March 4, 1929, was not the speech he would have liked to give. As Secretary of Commerce for eight years in the Harding and Coolidge administrations, Hoover had been an activist on the model of pre-World War I progressives like Theodore Roosevelt. But the postwar Republican Party was dominated by small-government conservatives and isolationists like Warren Harding and Calvin Coolidge. Harding was willing to give the secretary considerable leeway to pursue his ideas, but Coolidge, who derided Hoover as “wonder boy,” resisted or obstructed his efforts to expand the functions of the federal government to serve the growing population of an increasingly industrialized nation in an inter-connected world.</p>
			<p>Election to the presidency seemed to give Hoover an opportunity to press forward his ideas for expansion of the federal role, but when he sat down to write his inaugural address he was keenly aware that “certain differences” between his and Coolidge’s “points of view” cast a chilling shadow over his ambitions. Given Coolidge’s great popularity in the country and especially in the Republican Party, he risked splitting the party if he suggested taking the country in a dramatically different direction from his predecessor.</p>
			<p>The question, then, was what he <em>could</em> propose to do. In the end, he decided that he had to confine himself mainly to uncontroversial generalities&mdash;to “American ideals and aspirations,” as he put it in his memoirs. That was not a prescription for a stirring speech. Never a particularly good public speaker, and always better at dealing with the specific details of a problem than at enunciating broad principles or inspiring his listeners, Hoover began with some vague observations about a tricky issue, foreign policy. The country, he declared, had not only recovered from the war but had contributed to “the recovery and progress of the world,” giving “renewed hope and courage to all who have faith in government by the people.” Having thus staked a claim to world leadership without challenging his party’s isolationism, with which he privately disagreed, he slipped away from that difficult topic with more platitudes about how the world had come to respect America’s “influence and high purposes.”</p>
			<p>From foreign policy, Hoover moved on to the main theme of his 1928 campaign: the national prosperity for which Republicans had happily taken credit. The nation, he proclaimed, had achieved greater “comfort and security than ever existed before in the history of the world,” a victory over “widespread poverty” that assured Americans “a higher degree of individual freedom than ever before.” Although slightly less sweeping than his claim in his speech accepting the Republican nomination on August 11, 1928, that the United States was on the threshold of a “final triumph over poverty,” the contrast between his assumption of permanent prosperity and the grinding poverty of the Great Depression would forever shape Americans’ memories of the thirty-first President.</p>
			<p>Hoover devoted the longest section of his speech to a discussion of lawlessness that had grown out of popular opposition to the eighteenth amendment to the Constitution, which had made the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages illegal. Probably he would have preferred to avoid the topic. His friends remembered that when he lived in Europe before the war he enjoyed a martini before dinner and sometimes drank a glass of wine, but he was neither strongly against nor for Prohibition. When the law passed, he declared that while Secretary of Commerce he would neither serve nor drink alcohol. He found personal abstention easy, but as a presidential candidate in the deeply divided America of 1928 the issue was inescapable. Al Smith was an outspoken advocate of repeal, which created a dilemma for Hoover. He doubted that complete enforcement of Prohibition was possible, but he was unwilling to simply concede to Smith the votes of the “wet” cities on the East and West coasts. Accordingly, he attempted to find a middle position that might pacify both sides. In the end, he issued a statement describing Prohibition as “a great social and economic experiment, noble in motive and far-reaching in purpose” and promising “the efficient enforcement” of the law.</p>
			<p>His statement was widely ridiculed during the campaign as an attempt to straddle the problem, and Hoover apparently felt compelled to explain in his inaugural that he actually had a specific policy in mind. Ignoring the issue of repeal, he identified the central problem as “disregard and disobedience of law.” As long as Prohibition remained the law, he declared, individual Americans must respect and obey it, the states must make good faith efforts to enforce it, and even more important, “the entire Federal machinery of justice” must be overhauled to make enforcement swifter and more efficient. His only specific proposal, however, was the appointment of a “national commission” to study “the whole structure of our Federal system of jurisprudence” and to present recommendations for reform. To those listening to the speech, it appeared that the mountain had labored and brought forth a mouse.</p>
			<p>Having thus attempted to divert the torrent of debate about repeal into the dry channels of legal reform, Hoover then turned for the remainder of his address to a laundry list of proposals he had been advancing throughout the previous decade. They included self-regulation of business (with strict government oversight), promotion of education, a strengthening and extension of public health programs, the assertion of American leadership in advancing “the reign of justice and reason toward the extinction of force” in the world, and the promotion of what has come to be called the “good neighbor policy” toward Latin America. Most of these ideas were vague enough to elicit broad but shallow support. A reiteration of President Harding’s 1923 recommendation that the United States join the Permanent Court of International Justice, however, was sufficiently specific to awaken extreme isolationists and never won the approval of the Senate. A promise to call a Special Session of Congress to deal with the agricultural depression that had been haunting the country, and to reform the tariff, though offered in the optimistic atmosphere of prosperity, would evoke very different responses in the post-Crash atmosphere of late 1929. As the Depression deepened, a forgettable speech would be buried by more pressing issues.</p>
			<p>While Hoover spoke, the skies opened and cold rain poured down. Both the President and First Lady were soaked and shivering by the time the event concluded. Hoover closed with an assurance that the country’s future was “bright with hope,” but the weather was a better omen for the fate of his administration than his optimistic words.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
