<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Faith in America's Future: The Second Inaugural Address of Barack Obama: by James T. Kloppenberg</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-124" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Faith in America's Future: The Second Inaugural Address of Barack Obama</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> James T. Kloppenberg</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Barack Obama’s second inaugural address invokes Thomas Jefferson’s Declaration of Independence and Abraham Lincoln’s second inaugural in support of principles and policies that Obama championed from his first political campaigns. Obama entered public life as a community organizer in the impoverished Far South Side of Chicago, where he worked with a network of progressive religious activists to address glaring inequalities. His first electoral victory put him in the Illinois State Senate, where he struggled to forge compromises and address partisan gerrymandering. His 2004 speech at the Democratic National Convention, which stressed Americans’ unity at a time of increasingly stark divisions, launched his rapid, unlikely ascent from obscurity to the US Senate in 2004 and the presidency just two years later. In 2012, reelected by a smaller margin than in 2008 and confronting an increasingly hostile Republican majority in Congress, he delivered an inaugural address that showed his debts to the American democratic tradition and highlighted the distinctiveness of his sensibility.</p>
			<p>For Obama, liberty always meant more than freedom from constraint. The libertarian idea of freedom, doing whatever an individual wants to do, has dominated Republican Party ideology ever since Ronald Reagan declared government the “problem” in his first inaugural address. Instead, Obama contends that freedom, consistent with the tradition of “ordered liberty” central to American political thought since the seventeenth century, is always bounded by law. Individuals exercise their liberty when they act according to ethical maxims and within legal guidelines, not when they follow their preferences, or their impulses, regardless of the consequences for others.</p>
			<p>For Obama, freedom is but an empty promise when individuals lack the means to develop their capacities. In his book <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Audacity of Hope</i></cite>, Obama embraced the principles that Franklin D. Roosevelt articulated in his final campaign for the presidency in 1944, a “second bill of rights” that includes the right to a job, food, clothing, housing, health care, education, and insurance against the hazards of unemployment and old age. When Obama proclaims that “preserving our individual freedoms ultimately requires collective action,” he has in mind securing individuals’ freedom to fulfill their potential, not freedom from government. He calls for the nation to shoulder its responsibilities to “care for the vulnerable,” to guard everyone from “life’s worst hazards and misfortune,” and to secure for all citizens “a basic measure of security and dignity.”</p>
			<p>Equality, as Obama understands it, requires more than equal protection before the law, crucial as that principle is. Like Benjamin Franklin, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, and James Madison, Obama insists that “our country cannot succeed when a shrinking few do very well and a growing many barely make it.” The nation’s eighteenth-century founders believed that the rough equality of condition enjoyed by American men—with the glaring exception of enslaved Black people—not only distinguished the democratic United States from European monarchies, with their traditions of inherited aristocratic privilege, but it also made possible self-government. Like those earlier champions of democracy, Obama argues for a system of taxation in which the amount owed to the community increases along with the wealth derived from the conditions secured, and the laws enacted, by that community. Working from the premise that “all of us are created equal,” Obama locates more recent campaigns for equality regardless of gender, race, or sexual preference in the tradition of earlier struggles against white male supremacy waged by abolitionists and advocates of woman suffrage.</p>
			<p>Much as Americans celebrate “initiative and enterprise,” and productive as America’s market economy has been, Obama argues that the economy “thrives” for all only when it “rewards the effort and determination of every single American.” He rejects the neoliberal idea that increasing innovation and productivity require lavish compensation for some while others cannot escape “the brink of hardship,” let alone “find independence and pride in their work.” Although Obama denies that “all society’s ills can be cured through government alone,” he rejects the shibboleth that all economic regulation is an illegitimate intrusion. Government has set the rules for the marketplace since the eighteenth century, and the nation’s greatest economic growth came through establishing “rules to ensure competition and fair play.” When conditions are as unequal as they are in twenty-first century America, the idea of equal opportunity, like the abstract idea of purely negative freedom from constraints, rings hollow.</p>
			<p>Obama also departs from some aspects of earlier American political thought. He denies the existence of uniquely privileged perspectives and universal, unchanging truths. Shaped by late twentieth-century ideas of anti-foundationalism, cultural anthropology, historicism, and philosophical pragmatism, Obama insists that we must not “mistake absolutism for principle.” From his point of view, all ideas should be seen as cultural creations that reflect particular historical circumstances. The meaning of abstract principles such as liberty, equality, and democracy changes over time. Every generation must interpret the Constitution, the living law that “We the People” authorized and possess the power to amend. We must make persuasive arguments based on our values rather than venerating the document as sacred writ. Earlier Americans of European descent took for granted their right to possess lands occupied by indigenous people and their superiority to women and nonwhite people, assumptions about white male supremacy that most Americans now question. For centuries many Americans failed to recognize the need to preserve and protect rather than simply exploit the natural resources of the continent. Now, Obama observes, the hard fact of climate change requires us to develop “sustainable energy sources” to “preserve our planet.”</p>
			<p>Finally, Obama accepts not only the inevitability of different points of view but also the potentially productive quality of disagreement. We must not “substitute spectacle for politics” or allow “name-calling” to take the place of “reasoned debate,” because deliberation is the lifeblood of democracy. Americans need not understand liberty, equality, and the role of government in the exact same way in order to respect, debate with, and learn from each other. Self-rule does not require consensus. It demands only reverence for the rule of law, a commitment to marshaling evidence in support of arguments, reliance on persuasion rather than violence, and a willingness to concede our own limitations. Obama concedes that he does not have all the answers; he admits “that our work will be imperfect.” That epistemic humility, which has inspired his admirers and frustrated his critics on the left as well as the right, has from the start been integral to Obama’s understanding of American democracy.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
