<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Between Giants: The Inaugural Address of William Howard Taft, by Jonathan Lurie</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-70" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Between Giants<br/>
				The Inaugural Address of William Howard Taft</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Jonathan Lurie</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>March 4, 1909 found Washington <abbr class="initialism">D.C.</abbr> in the grip of a horrific blizzard, so severe that Taft’s inauguration was shifted inside to the Senate Chamber. The night before, Taft and his wife had stayed at the White House, as the guests of outgoing President Theodore Roosevelt amid an atmosphere replete with apparent tension between the two men. It was, apparently, the first night for the incoming president and the last for the outgoing chief executive who for the remainder of his life appears never to have returned to the Executive Mansion. In the wake of his triumphant re-election in 1904, Theodore Roosevelt had pledged that under no conditions would he accept re-nomination for a second full term in 1908. (He became President in September, 1901 upon the assassination of William McKinley)</p>
			<p>During much of Roosevelt’s tenure after 1904, Taft served in the cabinet as his Secretary of War. From 1900 until he joined the Roosevelt cabinet, he had been in the Philippines, where he ultimately become the Governing General. Admittedly a close friend of Roosevelt, Taft declined two offers from him of appointment to the Supreme Court, insisting that he needed to remain in his post on the Archipelago. By 1904, however, Roosevelt persuaded him to return home, even as popular commentary began to link him to the presidency, Roosevelt’s chosen successor in the 1908 election. By any measure a tough act to follow, Roosevelt had been a dynamic, effective and skillful political figure, adept at making use of “the bully pulpit ” But Taft was a very different public figure than Roosevelt. Conservative in outlook, ponderous and deliberative (if not phlegmatic]) in manner, he never was at home in politics. With the exception of a successful 1888 campaign for a judicial seat in Ohio, all of his numerous offices had come to him through appointment rather than election. Politics had no appeal for him. Indeed, “politics. when I am in it makes me sick.” Given a nomination he had not really desired, Taft gamely campaigned in the fall of 1908, always with a concerned Roosevelt cajoling, critiquing, and commenting in the background. He need not have worried, as Taft ended up with more than a million vote majority over William Jennings Bryan.</p>
			<p>As Roosevelt”s term wound down, from his cabinet post as Secretary of War Taft observed that increasingly the President became enamored with progressive causes, such as conservation, matters of public health, or ant- trust regulation. Working with the well established conservative Republican congressional leadership, throughout his tenure, Roosevelt had not hesitated to use the issue of tariff reform as a bargaining chip. In return for cooperation in getting other regulatory legislation passed, he made sure that tariff reform somehow never received presidential attention. As president-elect, Taft had to decide how far he would emulate Roosevelt’s neo progressive policies which had tended to split the GOP, as the 1908 election came and went. The answer emerged in his inaugural address, delivered before a packed Senate chamber whose guests included the former President.</p>
			<p>Speaking for about an hour. Taft immediately distanced himself from Roosevelt even though he repeatedly lauded the former President’s accomplishments. Taft promised to call Congress into special session specifically to confront the tariff issue, with the result (hopefully) of the “reduction of rates in certain schedules [plus]⁠ ⁠… the advancement of few, if any.” Pointing to a projected million dollar federal deficit, he added that if import duties (tariffs) do not secure an adequate income, “new kinds of taxation must be adopted, and among these I recommend a graduated inheritance tax.” Before the ensuing congressional battle over the tariff had ended, Taft would propose three new constitutional amendments, dealing with direct election of senators, the franchise for women, and a graduated income tax. All would be adopted. The “scope of a modern government,” added Taft, “has been widened far beyond the principles laid down by the old ‘laissez faire’ school of political writers, and this widening has met with popular approval.”</p>
			<p>Taft emphasized the accomplishments of Roosevelt even as he repeatedly called for “further legislative and executive action.” He believed “that the amendments to be proposed are just as necessary in the protection of legitimate business as in the clinching of the reforms which properly bear the name of my predecessor.” If his address thus far had reflected some aspects of progressive thought, its remainder revealed more conservative nuances. Thus Taft referred to the admission of Asiatic immigrants “who cannot be amalgamated with our population,” and hoped that “we may continue to minimize the evils likely to arise from such immigration without unnecessary friction.” Further, he devoted an unusual amount of space—more than any other topic covered in his address—to the South and the issue of racial integration.</p>
			<p>In 1909, there could be no doubt concerning two salient facts in American political life: a) that in terms of national politics the South voted a solid Democratic bloc, and b) that especially in the first decade of the 20th century, racial discrimination was widespread throughout the United States, not just in the South. Taft did not seek “to effect a change in the electoral vote of the Southern States,” as much as “an increase in tolerance of political view of all kinds and their advocacy throughout the South.” In other words, a viable Republican Party presence. As to the fifteenth Amendment that supposedly protected the ‘Negro race’ from “any deprivation of the privilege to vote,” it “never will be repealed and it never ought to be repealed, ” even though “if it had not been passed, it might be difficult now to adopt it.” Nevertheless it is now within our fundamental law, and “so long as the statutes of the States meet the test of this amendment,⁠ ⁠… it is not within the province of the Federal Government to interfere with the regulation by Southern States of their domestic affairs.”</p>
			<p>Appointment of a Black to federal office, however, represented a far different matter. In a single convoluted sentence, Taft revealed his innate racial bias: “It may well admit of doubt whether, in the case of any race, an appointment of one of their own to a local office in a community in which the race feeling is so widespread and acute as to interfere with the ease and facility with which the local government business can be done⁠ ⁠… is of sufficient benefit⁠ ⁠… to outweigh the recurrence and increase of race feeling which such an appointment is likely to engender.” Further, while it seems outlandish today, in 1909 Taft could believe that “the exercise of political franchises by those of this race who are intelligent and well to do will be acquiesced in, and the right to vote will be withheld only from the ignorant and irresponsible of both races.” In the meantime, echoing Booker T. Washington, Taft hoped that “a still greater improvement of the [Blacks] on the farm, and in the shop, and in other occupations may come.”</p>
			<p>Finally, Taft noted and strongly rejected the current progressive proposals to restrict the power of the federal courts to issue injunctions in industrial labor disputes. “As to that, my views are fixed.” Such action “would create a privileged class among the laborers and save the lawless among their number from a most needful remedy available to all men for the protection of their business against lawful invasion.” Indeed, “the proposition that business is not a property or pecuniary right which can be protected by equitable injunction is utterly without foundation in precedent or reason.” The secondary boycott, against which injunctive relief was often directed, “is an instrument of tyranny, and ought not to be made legitimate.”</p>
			<p>As has generally been true of his presidency, so too Taft’s inaugural address has not fared particularly well at the hands of historians who, finding much to praise in the tenure of Theodore Roosevelt jump immediately to that of Woodrow Wilson and his “New Freedom.” And again, Roosevelt would have been a hard act to follow for any successor, and all the more so for Taft who differed so markedly from Roosevelt in his approach to politics. “I cannot be more aggressive than my nature makes me.⁠ ⁠… If the people don’t like that kind of man then they have got to take another.” His address pointed to the forthcoming and tragic triumph of segregation throughout the South, as well as the inability of organized labor to withstand pressure from the federal courts. As an indicator of what was to come, his inaugural speech was all too accurate. On the other hand, Taft’s administration had some positive results as well that were mentioned, albeit all but barely hinted at, in the address. Taken in its entirety, the Taft inaugural address reflected both the prejudices of his time and the potential for change within its context.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
