<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Man of the People: The Second Inaugural Address of Thomas Jefferson: by Annette Gordon-Reed</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Man of the People: The Second Inaugural Address of Thomas Jefferson</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Annette Gordon-Reed</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>On March 4, 1805, when President Thomas Jefferson gave his second inaugural address in the wake of his re-election to the presidency of the United States, he faced drastically different circumstances from the time when he famously pronounced, “we are all republicans: we are all federalists” on the occasion of his first inaugural address. On that day, in March of 1803, those assembled to hear the newly-elected President speak in a voice so soft that many in the audience could not hear all he had to say were well aware of the bruising circumstances that attended his rise to the position of Chief Executive. After an extremely hard-hitting political battle against the incumbent John Adams, Jefferson and Aaron Burr (who was supposed to be vice-president) ended up with an equal number of electoral votes. The election had been thrown to the House of Representatives. Jefferson was elected on the 36th ballot.</p>
			<p>Jefferson’s first election was notable, among other things, for being the first transfer of power between the political parties that had been formed during the country’s first decade of existence —the Federalists, headed by Washington and Adams, and the Democratic-Republicans, headed by Jefferson. Jefferson later referred to his first election as the “Revolution of 1800” in which he and his fellow Democratic-Republicans, in his view, had brought the country back to the principles of 1776. The battles had not ceased. Although the Federalist press had been even more aggressive in attacking him during the run-up to his second election, he ultimately had a much easier time winning the second time around. He crushed his Federalist opponent Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, receiving 162 electoral votes to Pinckney’s 14. The Democratic-Republicans gained large majorities in the Senate and the House. So, as he gave his second inaugural address, as softly as he had his First, Jefferson had every reason to feel that he was more in command of the situation than he had been four years before, a confidence that is evident in the language employed in his speech.</p>
			<p>Notes he wrote in preparation for the address show that Jefferson perfectly understood the task before him.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“The former one [the First Inaugural] was an exposition of the principles on which I thought it my duty to administer the government. the second then should naturally be a Compte rendu, or a statement of facts, shewing that I have conformed to those principles. the former was <em>promise</em>: this is <em>performance</em>.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The choice of the word “performance” is interesting for two reasons. There is the substance—speaking about the things he did. But there is “performance” in another sense: the actual giving of the speech. Markings on the reading draft of the Address show that Jefferson paid particular attention to how he was going to deliver the speech. He placed markings for when he was to speak with particular emphasis and for moments when he was to pause. And unlike his first inaugural address, the Second was written in a form of shorthand. So, for example, the first paragraph:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Proceeding, fellow citizens, to that qualification which the constitution requires before my entrance on the charge again conferred on me, it is my duty to express the deep sense I entertain of this new proof of confidence from my fellow citizens at large, and the zeal with which it inspires me so to conduct myself as may best satisfy their just expectations.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">was rendered:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>proceedg. f. c. to yt qualfcn ′ wch ye Constn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> reqres. befre. my entrnce. on ye charge agn. conferd. on me †</p>
				<p>it is my duty t. exprss. ye deep sense I entertn. ′ of ys new proof of confidce. frm. my f. c. at large &amp; ye zeal wth. whch. it inspires m. ′ s. t. condct. myslf. ′ as m. best satsfy yr just expectns.′′<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>In his notes about the address, Jefferson set out six areas of concentration speech, or “heads” as he termed them, and he stuck to them:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>These heads are, Foreign affairs; Domestic do. viz. Taxes. Debts. Louisiana. Religion. Indians. the Press. none of these heads need any commentary but that of the Indians. this is a proper topic, not only to promote the work of humanising our citizens towards these people, but to conciliate to us the good opinion of Europe on the subject of the Indians.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Although well-written, as one would expect of Jefferson, his second inaugural address was not as profound or memorable as the first. That would seem natural given the circumstances outlined above, when much more was at stake. Jefferson was a known quantity by 1805. Before he was president, he had been branded a Jacobin who would bring chaos to the country. He would unleash the unbridled democracy of the mob. He would ban the Bible and confiscate it from private homes. Incest and adultery would become rampant.</p>
			<p>Of course, none of those things happened. Instead, as Jefferson emphasized in the first paragraphs of his address, during the four years of his presidency, the country had been stable and thriving. On foreign policy, his administration had kept the United States at peace with other nations—“we have endeavored to cultivate the friendship of all nations, &amp; especially of those with which we have the most important relations.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> Then, on the domestic front, the government was smaller and more efficient, he said. Playing to the voters who made up his base of support, he noted that the administration had favored the end to internal taxes, relying instead on tariffs which, he felt it important to point out, largely affected “those who [could] afford to add foreign luxuries to domestic comforts.” And then: “it may be the pleasure and the pride of an American to ask What farmer, what mechanic, what labourer ever sees a tax-gatherer of the US.?” He predicted that the country was on its way to being free of debt, one of his particular obsessions.</p>
			<p>Then Jefferson turned to his most important achievement of all. He had scored a historic diplomatic triumph that transformed the physical boundaries of the United States. The Louisiana Purchase of 1803 had doubled the size of the country and was widely popular among white Americans who believed in the goal of westward expansion. The Federalists, as Jefferson reminded without mentioning his opponents by name, had, in the main, been opposed to the deal. They feared the prospect of upsetting the balance of power as the territory potentially would bring more Western and Southern states into the Union, the sprawl endangering the viability of the Republic. Jefferson had an answer to that fear in one of the address’s more memorable lines: “but who can limit the extent to which the federative principle may operate effectively?” The Purchase was of questionable enough constitutionality that Jefferson had drafted his own Amendment to the Constitution to allow for the transaction. As time was of the essence in making the deal, however, he decided to go ahead without invoking the Amendment process. This alone made him and his party enormously popular.</p>
			<p>After a brief mention of religion—it was not a matter for interference by the federal government—Jefferson turned to the poignant section of the address, discussing the “Aboriginals”. He restated a position that he had expressed privately and in <cite>Notes on the State of Virginia</cite>: Native peoples had to be incorporated into the United States by a process of assimilation. They had to give up their ways of life. He scorned the idea that peoples should do things because their ancestors had done those things, a point he had made in other contexts, and presented the triumph of the European Americans as a fait accompli:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>the stream of overflowing population from other regions directed itself on these shores. without power to divert, or habits to contend against it, they have been overwhelmed by the current, or driven before it.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>There was no way, in his telling, of a different outcome.</p>
			<p>Jefferson followed a fairly long disquisition on the nature of the press. He had been known as a champion of press freedom, but it appears that his bruising experience between 1798 and the period before the election had given him a more jaundiced view. He spoke of the “artillery of the press” that has been used against him and his fellow Democratic-Republicans. In any event, the best guard against overreaching by the press would be the public.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>public judgment will correct false reasonings &amp; opinions, on a full hearing of all parties; and no other definite line can be drawn between the inestimable liberty of the press, and it’s demoralising licentiousness. if there be still improprieties which this rule would not restrain, it’s Supplement must be sought in the Censorship of Public opinion.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a></p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>After stating all of his administration’s accomplishments, Jefferson ended on an optimistic note, indicating that he took the results to be a mandate to continue in the direction he had taken. Like most presidents who have two terms, Jefferson’s second term in office would be seen as, if not a failure, a disappointment. On March 4, 1805, however, the prospects for continued success seemed clear to him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
