<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Camelot The Inaugural Address of John F. Kennedy, by Barbara Ann Perry</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-96" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Camelot<br/>
				The Inaugural Address of John F. Kennedy</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Barbara Ann Perry</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>January 20, 1961, John F. Kennedy’s Inauguration Day, dawned clear but frigid, after the eight-inch snowfall on the nation’s capital overnight. JFK and his wife, Jacqueline, had already thrilled Washington on Inauguration Eve, looking like a couple just stepping out of a fairy tale about a handsome prince and beautiful princess, as they attended a star-studded gala, produced by their friend Frank Sinatra. After eight years of the elderly President Dwight Eisenhower, the New Frontier, as Kennedy’s administration would be called, burst on the scene with panache and vigor, a favorite JFK description (pronounced with his Boston accent as “vigah”) for the activism he envisioned to get “the country moving again.”</p>
			<p>Kennedy’s election marked two unprecedented milestones: at age 43, he was the youngest candidate ever elected to the nation’s highest office and the first Roman Catholic. As he stood to take the oath of office, placing his hand on his Church’s version of the Bible, he represented the faith of a quarter of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> population and an immigrant heritage of all but Native Americans. JFK was just three generations removed from his four great-grandparents who had emigrated as dirt-poor refugees from the mid-nineteenth century’s devastating Irish potato famine.</p>
			<p>The outgoing president who, at 70, was the same age as Kennedy’s mother, and had suffered serious illnesses during his two terms in the White House, sat bundled against the icy temperatures, a scarf swaddling his neck, and his wispy white strands of hair blowing in the breeze. What a contrast when JFK stood at the podium, sans topcoat, scarf, gloves, or hat, his thick shock of auburn hair not in the least out of place. He had spent the weeks leading up to this historic day at his parents’ Florida beachfront compound, naming his Cabinet and sunning around the pool. Thus, despite his own medical issues, most of which remained hidden from the public, he looked the picture of health and vitality, even on the era’s black and white TV screens.</p>
			<p>In his acceptance speech at the 1960 Democratic Conventions, Kennedy had introduced the metaphor that would identify his presidency: “We stand today on the edge of a New Frontier,” he declared in Los Angeles, “—the frontier of the 1960s, the frontier of unknown opportunities and perils, the frontier of unfilled hopes and unfilled threats.⁠ ⁠… Beyond that frontier are uncharted areas of science and space, unsolved problems of peace and war, unconquered problems of ignorance and prejudice, unanswered questions of poverty and surplus.” He then focused the frontier imagery primarily on domestic issues.</p>
			<p>In his Inaugural Address, however, he chose to emphasize Cold War challenges that he would face in foreign and defense policy. Like all of JFK’s most important and memorable speeches, this historic inaugural address featured pithy syntax, soaring rhetoric, and compelling symbolism. He and his wordsmith, Theodore Sorensen, perfected the use of political symbols, defined by scholar Barbara Hinckley as those that “convey a larger range of meaning beyond themselves, with emotional, moral, or psychological impact. This larger meaning need not be independently true but will tap ideas people want to believe in as true.”</p>
			<p>Kennedy began his first address to the American people and the world as president with a paean to freedom represented by his election and the peaceful transition of power, a not-so-veiled contrast to authoritarian regimes in the communist bloc. With a nod to the nation’s Founders, he praised their “revolutionary beliefs” that “are still at issue around the globe—the belief that the rights of man come not from the generosity of the state but from the hand of God.” Having fought anti-Catholicism to become president, vowing to maintain the constitutional separation of church and state, JFK did not hesitate to call on the deistic natural rights theory embraced by drafters of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.</p>
			<p>Yet in the second paragraph of this speech, Kennedy cited how drastically the world had changed in the nuclear age: “For man holds in his mortal hands the power to abolish all forms of human poverty and all forms of human life.” He could not have known that in October 1962, during the Cuban Missile Crisis, he would hold in <em>his</em> hands the fate of the world, as it faced the possibility of nuclear annihilation if the United States and the Soviet Union went to war over the latter’s placement of atomic warheads, just ninety miles off the Florida coast and aimed at all major <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> cities.</p>
			<p>Illustrating Kennedy’s youth, in contrast to his predecessor, he fashioned one of the most memorable symbols of the entire speech. As the first president born in the twentieth century, he proclaimed, “Let the word go forth from this time and place, to fried and foe alike, that the torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans.⁠ ⁠…” He was leading the junior members of the World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> generation, many of whom, like him, were the young officers who served in Europe, where his brother Joseph Jr. lost his life as a Navy aviator, and in the Pacific, where JFK, a Navy PT boat skipper, nearly met his end when a Japanese destroyer rammed and sank his vessel. “The graves of young Americans who answered the call to service surround the globe,” Kennedy declared. “Now the trumpet summons us again.”</p>
			<p>Whether fighting for “human rights” against fascism in the Second World War, or against communism in the Cold War, Kennedy signaled in the following passage—an exemplar of his and Sorensen’s crisp phrasing that brought to mind the Gettysburg Address—that “we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe to assure the survival and success of liberty.”</p>
			<p>A one-sentence paragraph introduced his promises to the world: “This much we pledge—and more.” He spoke directly to our “old allies whose cultural and spiritual origins we share,” to “those new states whom we welcome to the ranks of the free,” to “those people in the huts and villages of half the globe struggling to break the bonds of mass misery,” to “our sister republics south of the border,” and to the United Nations. From his days as a teenager devouring Winston Churchill’s history of the English people, magazines, and newspapers, and, as a college student, serving his father, Ambassador Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., in the United Kingdom, and then writing his Harvard honors thesis on Britain’s unpreparedness for World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, JFK had been an staunch internationalist. He believed in the idealism of alliances and the practical contributions they made to America’s geopolitical interests. President Kennedy’s establishment of the Peace Corps, just two months after the inauguration, would embody both his ideals and pragmatism.</p>
			<p>Now, as a Cold Warrior, he aimed his rhetoric at “those nations who would make themselves our adversary.” He called for peace to avoid “accidental self-destruction,” but swore to maintain parity in the arms race in order to avoid tempting the communists “with weakness.” “So let us begin anew—remembering on both sides that civility is not a sign of weakness.⁠ ⁠… Let us never negotiate out of fear. But let us never fear to negotiate,” JFK asserted. He offered an olive branch, along with a quiver of arrows, just as the American eagle possesses in the presidential seal.</p>
			<p>Recognizing the potentially peaceful uses of science, Kennedy begged “both sides” in this bi-polar world (free <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. communist) to invoke technology’s “wonders⁠ ⁠… instead of its terrors. Together let us explore the stars.⁠ ⁠…” The latter goal would go unheeded as both the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> and the <abbr class="initialism">USSR</abbr> raced to be the first to land a man on the moon and return him safely to earth, with Americans, inspired by JFK, achieving that technological wonder in 1969, six years after JFK’s tragic assassination.</p>
			<p>In the most quoted line from the address, Kennedy importuned his fellow Americans to “ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country,” a sentiment borrowed and paraphrased from his prep-school headmaster. Yet it is JFK’s concluding oration that remains the heart and soul of his applauded Inaugural Address: “Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you. With a good conscience our only sure reward, with history the final judge of our deeds, let us go forth to lead the land we love, asking His blessing and His help, but knowing that here on earth God’s work must truly be our own.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
