<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 82</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-82" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of Franklin D. Roosevelt</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Cynthia M. Koch</h3>
			<p>On Inauguration Day, March 4, 1933, Washington was cold and overcast. Homeless men wandered the streets. Flags hung at half-mast in memory of Senator Thomas J. Walsh, who had died while en route to Washington to serve as attorney general.</p>
			<p>The president-elect and his family, Cabinet members, and close associates attended a precedent-setting prayer service at St. John’s Episcopal Church directly across Lafayette Square from the White House. The Reverend Endicott Peabody, headmaster of Groton School (which FDR had attended as a boy), officiated. When the service ended, FDR remained on his knees in silent prayer.</p>
			<p>At the Capitol, with his legs encased in steel braces, the president-elect steadied himself on the arm of his eldest son James as he made his way to the rostrum. He placed his hand on the ancient Roosevelt family bible, printed in Amsterdam in 1686. It was open&mdash;as it always was when FDR was sworn to office&mdash;to St. Paul’s First Epistle to the Corinthians: “And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these three; but the greatest of these is charity.” Breaking another tradition, he repeated word for word the solemn oath administered by Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes. Then, as the crowd grew quiet, Franklin Roosevelt offered hope to a desperate people with bold words that still reverberate in public memory. “This great nation will endure as it has endured, will revive, and will prosper.⁠ ⁠… [T]he only thing we have to fear is fear itself.”</p>
			<p>The address was delivered in one of the nation’s darkest hours, at a time when many objective observers felt Americans had plenty to fear. The country was in the third year of the worst economic depression in its history. By the end of 1932, fifteen million workers&mdash;one out of every three&mdash;had lost their jobs. U.S. Steel’s payroll of full-time workers fell from 225,000 in 1929 to none in early 1933. In the steel town of Youngstown, Ohio, unemployment was 78 percent&mdash;more than three times the national average of 25 percent.</p>
			<p>People were hungry. Ninety percent of the population of the coalfields of West Virginia and Kentucky suffered from malnutrition. In the cities, where there were some social services, only about one in four unemployed workers received any assistance from a patchwork of local government aid and charity. Long lines for bread and soup snaked through city streets.</p>
			<p>Farm income fell from $12 billion in 1929 to $5 billion in 1932. The price of a bushel of Iowa corn was worth less than a package of chewing gum. In the South thousands of acres of cotton rotted in the fields, not worth the cost of harvest. Farmers could not meet their mortgage payments or taxes. Between 1929 and 1933, a third of all American farmers lost their farms.</p>
			<p>By early 1933 nearly half of the $20 billion in home mortgages was in default. More than a thousand homeowners were foreclosed daily. Renters were evicted. People thrown out of their homes gathered in shantytowns derisively called Hoovervilles. Schools were closed as state and local governments ran out of money to pay their teachers.</p>
			<p>Violence was in the air. In Iowa and Nebraska, a group known as the Farm Holiday movement announced a farmers’ strike. They blocked highways leading to the agricultural markets in Omaha, Sioux City, and Des Moines. They dumped milk into ditches. They turned back cattle. When forty-nine picketers were arrested in Council Bluffs, Iowa, a thousand farmers assembled to break them out of jail.</p>
			<p>A group of 43,000 desperate World War I veterans and their families arrived in Washington from all over the country in the summer of 1932. Known as the Bonus Army, they demanded early payment of bonuses due them for military service. Their camp was forcibly dispersed under orders from President Hoover, resulting in the death of two veterans.</p>
			<h4>The Interregnum</h4>
			<p>Roosevelt was elected on November 8, 1932, but the Twentieth Amendment&mdash;which changed Inauguration Day from March 4 to January 20&mdash;would not be in effect until 1937. In the sixteen long weeks before March 4, 1933, conditions grew even more desperate as a new banking crisis gripped the nation. On inauguration morning the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading, as did the Chicago Board of Trade. Thirty-eight states, including New York and Illinois, had already closed their banks.</p>
			<p>It was an age of dictators and democracy was in peril. For many Mussolini’s Italy and Stalin’s Soviet Union seemed preferable to the dysfunction in the United States. Hitler’s rise to power on January 31 only confirmed belief in the efficiency of the totalitarian state. Former New York Governor Al Smith, once a political mentor to FDR and now a critic, compared America’s plight to the crisis of war. “What does a democracy do in war,” he asked. “It becomes a tyrant, a despot, a real monarch.” In World War I, he declared with exaggeration, “[W]e took our Constitution, wrapped it up and laid it on the shelf and left it there until it was over.” Alf Landon, Republican governor of Kansas who would be Roosevelt’s opponent in 1936, declared, “[E]ven the iron hand of a national dictator is in preference to a paralytic stroke.” Visiting Roosevelt in Warm Springs, Georgia, in January, the respected columnist Walter Lippmann told FDR, “The situation is critical, Franklin. You may have no alternative but to assume dictatorial powers.”</p>
			<p>In February the country almost lost the president-elect to an assassin’s bullet. After Roosevelt spoke from an open car to a crowd in Miami on February 15, gunshots rang out. An out-of-work anarchist named Guiseppe Zangara fired five bullets at FDR from close range. A bystander deflected his hand, but Zangara wounded four people and fatally shot Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak. Roosevelt’s calm and courage in the face of the attack gave confidence to a badly shaken nation.</p>
			<h4>Inaugural Address</h4>
			<p>Roosevelt began working on his Inaugural Address as the banking crisis deepened. On February 27 his advisor Raymond Moley arrived with a draft at the Roosevelt home in Hyde Park, New York. FDR began to rework it (ultimately there were four drafts) and completed it the next day&mdash;except for the reference to fear, which was added after an introduction from Louis Howe arrived on February 28 containing the phrase “We have nothing to fear but fear itself.” FDR added it to his speech and elaborated on it. The origins of the phrase are murky and Sam Rosenman, FDR’s advisor and speechwriter, linked it to Henry David Thoreau’s “[N]othing is so much to be feared as fear,” but Moley&mdash;who was with FDR at the time&mdash;discounts the connection. Scholars have noted that the concept has a long history; Francis Bacon said essentially the same thing in the early seventeenth century.</p>
			<p>Roosevelt made one last change before delivering the nineteen-minute speech: the opening line “[T]his is a day of consecration,” which he added by hand while waiting in the Senate Committee Room of the Capitol before the inauguration. In delivering the speech, he added one more crucial word: “This is a day of <em>national</em> consecration.” This change encapsulates the intermingling of religious faith and patriotism that gives the speech its power.</p>
			<p>In the famous opening paragraph, Roosevelt embellished the “fear” phrasing with a reassuring reminder of the nation’s history. “This great Nation will endure as it has endured, will revive and will prosper.” The memorable statement “So, first of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself&mdash;nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance” introduces the speech’s war theme. “In every dark hour of our national life a leadership of frankness and vigor has met with that understanding and support of the people themselves which is essential to victory.”</p>
			<p>FDR was summoning people to a holy war against “false leadership.” The present crisis, he assured them, “comes from no failure of substance. We are stricken by no plague of locusts.” At fault are the “unscrupulous money changers, ” who have now been driven from “their high seats in the temple of our civilization. We may now restore that temple to the ancient truths.” And those ancient truths are “social values more noble than mere monetary profit.”</p>
			<p>The body of the speech describes his proposals for “action and action now”: jobs for the unemployed, “treating the task as we would treat the emergency of a war” with the workers “accomplishing greatly needed projects to stimulate and reorganize the use of our natural resources”; national planning to address the “overbalance of population in our industrial centers and⁠ ⁠… to provide a better use of the land for those best fitted for the land”; and “two safeguards against a return of the evils of the old order,”⁠ ⁠… “strict supervision of all banking and credits and investments” and⁠ ⁠… “provision for an adequate but sound currency.”</p>
			<p>Again, he returned to the martial theme. “These are the lines of attack,” he assured his listeners, while pledging that he will use the instruments of democracy. “I shall presently urge upon a new Congress, in special session, detailed measures for their fulfillment, and I shall seek the immediate assistance of the several States.”</p>
			<p>He dismissed Hoover’s focus on international trade as secondary to “first things first,” that is, “putting our own national house in order and making income balance outgo.” In terms of international relations, FDR spoke of dedicating the nation to “the policy of the good neighbor&mdash;the neighbor who resolutely respects himself and, because he does so, respects the rights of others.”</p>
			<p>Approaching his conclusion, Roosevelt introduced “interdependence,” an idea that would be repeated throughout his presidency. “[I]f we are to go forward, we must move as a trained and loyal army willing to sacrifice for the good of a common discipline.” He called upon Americans to embrace “the larger purposes [that] will bind upon us all as a sacred obligation with a unity of duty hitherto evoked only in time of armed strife.”</p>
			<p>He then moved to his peroration, a declaration that Eleanor Roosevelt said “was very solemn and a little terrifying.”</p>
			<p>
				<blockquote>I am prepared under my constitutional duty to recommend the measures that a stricken Nation in the midst of a stricken world may require. These measures, or such other measures as the Congress may build out of its experience and wisdom, I shall seek, within my constitutional authority, to bring to speedy adoption. But in the event that the Congress shall fail⁠ ⁠… I shall ask the Congress for the one remaining instrument to meet the crisis⁠—broad Executive power to wage a war against the emergency, as great as the power that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe.</blockquote>
			</p>
			<p>The speech electrified the nation and was soon followed by the remarkable legislative accomplishments of the First Hundred Days. The economic success of Roosevelt’s declaration of war against the Great Depression is debated by historians, but one thing is clear from this speech and the leadership that followed: Roosevelt rallied the people and restored confidence in democracy at a time when its very survival was at stake.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
