<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of James Madison</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Stuart Eric Leibiger</h3>
			<p>At noon on Saturday, March 4, 1809, fifty-seven-year-old Virginian James Madison read his first⁠&mdash;and the nation’s sixth⁠&mdash;inaugural address from a hand-written manuscript in the House of Representatives chamber in the United States Capitol building in Washington, D.C. “A large concourse of citizens” joined Congress to witness the speech. “Such was the interest to be present at the Inauguration that the whole area allotted to citizens in the Representative Hall was filled, and overflowing several hours before noon,” reported the <i>National Intelligencer</i>. “It is computed that the number of persons surrounding the Capitol, unable to obtain admittance, exceeded ten thousand.”</p>
			<p>After assuring his listeners of the profound sense of duty impressed upon him “by the call of my Country” to the presidency, Madison candidly pronounced “the present situation” of the nation “full of difficulties.” Yet he could not bring himself to blame the country’s political, economic, and diplomatic woes on the preceding administration. That regime had been led by his good friend Thomas Jefferson, under whom he himself had been the secretary of state, overseeing the realm of foreign affairs where the country’s troubles had begun. During Jefferson’s presidency, the United States had found itself caught between the belligerent nations Great Britain and France, who were locked in the bitter conflict known as the Napoleonic Wars. On the one hand, the war offered tremendous trade opportunities, as both sides eagerly sought U.S. agricultural products. But on the other hand, U.S. ships headed for either England or France were often seized and confiscated by the navy of the other side on the high seas. Jefferson’s solution to the dilemma was the Embargo, passed by a compliant Republican Congress in 1807. An ill-fated attempt at economic coercion, the Embargo banned all exports from the U.S. until the belligerent nations stopped seizing American ships. Instead of bringing Great Britain and France to their knees in their desperation for American produce, the Embargo instead threw the U.S. into an economic recession. One reason for the Embargo’s failure was the refusal of New England merchants to abide by it. These traders were willing to take their chances on the high seas, knowing that enough cargoes would reach their destinations to turn handsome profits despite occasional ship seizures. Determined to give his Embargo a fair trial, Jefferson tried to enforce it on the New England states by martial law. Congress’s repeal of the Embargo took effect on March 4, 1809, the very day Madison took office. The administration’s experiment in economic coercion had failed. It would be up to the new president, an originator of the hapless Embargo, to deal with the fallout.</p>
			<p>Madison’s First Inaugural Address thus could hardly blame the nation’s troubles on his predecessor. “It is a precious reflection,” declared Madison, “that the transition from this prosperous condition of our Country, to the scene which has for some time been distressing us, is not chargeable on any unwarrantable views, nor, as I trust, on any involuntary errors in the public Counsils.” Instead, Madison blamed the nation’s misfortunes on the extreme and desperate measures of Great Britain and France. “In their rage against each other,” Madison bemoaned, “principles of retaliation have been introduced, equally contrary to universal reason, and acknowledged law.” With the unexpected failure of the Embargo, “how long their arbitrary edicts will be continued⁠ ⁠… cannot be anticipated.”</p>
			<p>Madison’s First Inaugural Address did not offer new policy proposals to deal with the crisis. Instead, it promised that the U.S. would “cherish peace and friendly intercourse with all nations having correspondent dispositions,” and would “maintain sincere neutrality towards belligerent nations.” War would be a last resort. Madison further pledged “to support the Constitution⁠ ⁠… in its limitations as in its authorities.” Perhaps already anticipating a war with Great Britain, Madison assured that his administration would never use events as an excuse to trample personal rights and liberties enshrined in the Bill of Rights that he himself had authored. He would “avoid the slightest interference with the rights of conscience, or the functions of religion,” and would “preserve in their full energy, the other salutary provisions in behalf of private and personal rights, and of the freedom of the press.” His administration would not take advantage of the crisis to aggrandize the power of the federal government, or to militarize American society by the introduction of “a standing military force” that Revolutionary Era citizens had dreaded so much as an instrument of tyranny.</p>
			<p>In facing an uncertain future, Madison’s First Inaugural Address promised that he would be guided by the “illustrious” examples of his predecessors as chief executive, including Jefferson. He would also rely on “the well tried intelligence and virtue of my fellow citizens” and on the support and advice of the other branches of the federal government. Finally, he would look to the “guardianship and guidance of that Almighty Being⁠ ⁠… whose blessings have been so conspicuously dispensed to this rising Republic.”</p>
			<p>After failing to halt the seizures of American ships (mainly by the British, who had established naval superiority on the Atlantic Ocean) and to stop the British practice of impressment of sailors from U.S. vessels, Madison sought a declaration of war against Great Britain in 1812. An uncharismatic leader, Madison performed disappointingly as Commander in Chief during the War of 1812. He failed to provide the vigorous and competent leadership of the armed forces during conflict that George Washington had once demonstrated. He could not prevent the British from invading Washington, D.C. in 1814 and burning the public buildings, including the White House. Throughout the hostilities, however, Madison scrupulously adhered to the promise articulated in his inaugural address to preserve and protect personal rights and liberties. President Madison, in short, led the U.S. through a second war for independence against Great Britain without undermining or infringing upon the nation’s republican principles. In so doing, he maintained the devotion of his fellow citizens, and could almost certainly have won a third term as president had he desired one.</p>
			<p>James Madison is perhaps the only president whose pre-presidential career is studied more than his presidency. Yet his presidency witnessed many critical events, not the least of which was the first ever presidential request for a congressional declaration of war. Interestingly, President Madison’s First Inaugural Address was not the first inaugural speech that he wrote. In 1789, as a confidential advisor to president-elect George Washington, Madison had ghostwritten a draft of the very first inaugural address. Indeed, as the Father of the Constitution and the Father of the Bill of Rights, Madison came to the presidency more well versed in American constitutionalism than any other president, qualifications amply demonstrated by his First Inaugural Address.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
