<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>"A Thousand Points of Light": The Inaugural Address of George H. W. Bush: by Mary Kate Cary</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-112" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">"A Thousand Points of Light": The Inaugural Address of George <abbr class="name">H. W.</abbr> Bush</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Mary Kate Cary</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>President George <abbr class="name">H. W.</abbr> Bush gave his inaugural address on the 200th anniversary of George Washington’s Inauguration. To mark the occasion, he chose to be sworn in on two Bibles: the one that George Washington used, and a family Bible opened to the Beatitudes. As the historian and author Jon Meacham pointed out to him, George Bush was one of only three presidents—along with Washington and Eisenhower—to open his address with a prayer. Meacham quoted that prayer years later at Bush’s funeral, in his famous eulogy for the late president.</p>
			<p>President Bush once reminisced about his inaugural address in a compilation of his favorite speeches, entitled <cite>Speaking of Freedom</cite>. In it, he remembered the details of the day:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Inauguration Day at dawn was beautiful and sunny, with just a little chill in the air—nothing like the bitter cold of some past inaugurations in Washington. We were all up early, and the day began with a family prayer service at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Church on Lafayette Square. Afterward, Barbara and I met the Reagans for coffee at the White House, which was very relaxing.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Once they arrived at the ceremonies, the President-elect enjoyed being surrounded on the podium by his wife, children, grandchildren, and his eighty-seven-year-old mother, as Justice Sandra Day O’Connor swore in Vice President Quayle, and Chief Justice William Rehnquist “did the honors” for President Bush. Then the President remembered this about the address itself, which was written with the help of former Reagan speechwriter Peggy Noonan:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“When we began working on the speech earlier in January, I knew I wanted to begin with a prayer. A few other presidents have done that, but not too many. Then the speech went on to describe what I called ‘the age of the offered hand.’ We were seeking a new engagement with others—whether domestically, through those Americans already known as ‘the thousand points of light,’ as we sought to solve our nation’s toughest challenges; through our relations with Congress, to work together without partisan rancor; or through our efforts to work with other nations to promote freedom for all people and end oppression. All over the world, the day of the dictator was over, and a ‘new breeze was blowing.’”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The theme of the speech was built upon a powerful but unattributed quote: “I take as my guide the hope of a saint: in crucial things, unity; in important things, diversity; in all things, generosity.”</p>
			<p>For example, in the speech, the President made a reference to President Kennedy’s inaugural address. Kennedy had said in 1960: “Now the trumpet summons us again—not as a call to bear arms, though arms we need; not as a call to battle, though embattled we are⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Instead, President Bush added to Kennedy’s allegory: “Some see leadership as high drama and the sound of trumpets calling, and sometimes it is that. But I see history as a book with many pages, and each day we fill a page with acts of hopefulness and meaning. The new breeze blows, a page turns, the story unfolds. And so, today a chapter begins, a small and stately story of unity, diversity, and generosity—shared and written, together.”</p>
			<p>He referred to this theme of unity, diversity, and generosity again when he turned dramatically to face the assembled House and Senate leadership next to him on the steps of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Capitol: “To my friends, and yes, I do mean friends—in the loyal opposition, and yes, I mean loyal—I put out my hand. I am putting out my hand to you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Speaker. I am putting out my hand to you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Majority Leader. For this is the thing: this is the age of the offered hand⁠ ⁠… The American people await action. They didn’t send us here to bicker. They ask us to rise above the merely partisan. ‘In crucial things, unity’—and this, my friends, is crucial.”</p>
			<p>To critics, the “age of the offered hand” sounded naive, given that both houses of Congress were under Democratic control—in fact, Democrats were then nearing 40 years of majority rule in the House—and increasing partisanship roiled Washington. However, President Bush went on to win bipartisan support for landmark legislation such as the 1990 Civil Rights Act, the Clean Air Act of 1990, and the Americans with Disabilities Act—as well as Congressional approval for the successful first Persian Gulf War.</p>
			<p>But perhaps the biggest legacy of the speech was its foreshadowing of the end of the Cold War and the fall of the Soviet empire. President Bush rightly sensed that the great nations dominated by the Soviets were moving toward democracy, and that their citizens knew how to secure a more just and prosperous life for themselves. We wouldn’t need to invent a new system for them, he said, because, “We know what works: Freedom works. We know what’s right: Freedom is right.” Within a year of his Inaugural, the Berlin Wall would come crashing down and millions of East Europeans would be freed from totalitarianism—without a shot being fired. He later spoke often of “Europe, whole and free.”</p>
			<p>“Re-reading the speech now,” President Bush wrote years later, “I am struck by the feeling we all had that tremendous change was about to take place, and the sense of momentum that was with us all that day.”</p>
			<p>How right he was. The world events that took place soon after his Inaugural address changed the lives of millions of people all over the globe. George Bush will best be remembered for standing for unity, diversity, and generosity during a crucial moment in world history.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
