<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 94</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-94" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Second Inaugural Address of Dwight D. Eisenhower</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Louis Paul Galambos</h3>
			<p>On November 6, 1956, American voters gave Republican Dwight David (Ike) Eisenhower an impressive (57.4%) majority of their votes for a second term as President of the United States. This former Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, military commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and thirty-fourth <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> President swept the Electoral College vote 457 to 73 against his Democratic rival, Governor Adlai Stevenson. The breadth of this victory should have made the Second Inaugural Address a mere victory lap for his party and its acclaimed leader. There were, however, too many dark clouds around Washington and the nation to allow the Inauguration to descend into pride and puffery.</p>
			<p>The President and the American voters still had reason to wonder if their elected leader would remain healthy through the next four years. Eisenhower had long experienced a number of stress-related problems, beginning with his years at West Point prior to American entry into World War I. He smoked throughout his military career and was chain-smoking as many as four packs of cigarettes a day when he commanded the successful D-Day landing in France. This habit and the pressures of his career caught up with him repeatedly and in September 1955, he suffered a major heart attack. He had barely recovered before a massive attack of ileitis in June 1956 sent him back to the hospital and into surgery. Again, he recovered and won the 1956 election, but he, First-Lady Mamie Eisenhower, and the nation could not be certain he would be able to provide the firm hand that he had displayed in the previous four years.</p>
			<p>The President’s vigorous participation in the Inaugural Ceremonies on January 21, 1957, gave reassurance that he had fully recovered from his heart attack and subsequent surgery. On a cold, gray day with occasional light flurries of snow, the President stood during the entire 3 hours of the parade. A similarly positive conclusion had been projected by Ike’s State of the Union Address on January 10, and his Annual Budget Message on January 17th. In the Budget Message, he reported on a growing economy, a balanced budget, and a successful effort to control inflation. The State of the Union Address was a less optimistic call to hard duty in a dangerous world, but there too, the President could see foreshadowed “a world transformed by the spirit of freedom.”</p>
			<p>His Second Inaugural Address offered a similar vision of America’s “time of trial.” While we enjoyed prosperity, he said, much of the world experienced “want, discord, danger. New forces and new nations stir and strive across the earth, with power to bring, by their fate, great good or great evil to the free world’s future.” The breakup of the old empires and the socialist- and communist-leaning new governments of Africa and Asia were forefront on the President’s mind. Indeed, much of the world was swinging to the Left, toward the Soviet Union and away from the American model of democratic capitalism. Eisenhower frequently found that broad transition difficult to understand and confront, but in his Inaugural Address, he stamped the struggle in stark, moral terms.</p>
			<p>In Europe, there was abundant evidence of International Communism’s “bondage.” Soviet tanks had just recently crushed the Hungarian Revolution. “Budapest,” Ike said, “is no longer merely the name of a city; henceforth it is a new and shining symbol of man’s yearning to be free.” But of course, those men and women who had pledged “their lives to that love” had been defeated. Nor had the German problem been solved: “In the heart of Europe, Germany still stands tragically divided. So is the whole continent divided. And so, too, is all the world.” Ike called for Americans to stay the course, to commit themselves to “our firm and fixed purpose&mdash;the building of a peace with justice in a world where moral law prevails.”</p>
			<p>The moral order and the American alliance system had both become shaky in 1956, when Israel, Britain and France launched an invasion of Egypt over control of the Suez Canal. Egypt’s President Nasser had provoked the attack by nationalizing the Canal, but Eisenhower recognized that the Suez Canal Company, as well as the invasion, was a relic of a fast-fading colonial era of gunboat diplomacy. Incensed because he had not been informed of the attack, the President looked to “the authority of the United Nations. For in that body rests the best hope of our age for the assertion of that law by which all nations may live in dignity.” Leaning hard against America’s three allies, Eisenhower would shortly succeed in ending the invasion and performing “the work of peace” that he called for in his Inaugural Address.</p>
			<p>The President left no doubt that we still needed our Cold War allies to continue their opposition to the “divisive force” of “International Communism and the power that it controls. The designs of that power, dark in purpose, are clear in practice. It strives to seal forever the fate of those it has enslaved. It strives to break the ties that unite the free. It strives to capture&mdash;to exploit for its own greater power&mdash;all forces of change in the world, especially the needs of the hungry and the hopes of the oppressed.” Eisenhower was seeking support for the foreign aid that would satisfy some of those “needs” and fulfill some of those “hopes.” He acknowledged that the international struggle would be expensive. “To counter the threat of those who seek to rule by force, we must pay the costs of our own needed military strength, and help to build the security of others. We must use our skills and knowledge and, at times, our substance, to help others rise from misery, however far the scene of suffering may be from our shores. For wherever in the world a people knows desperate want. There must appear at least the spark of hope, the hope of progress&mdash;or there will surely rise at last the flames of conflict.”</p>
			<p>As the Address made clear, the Eisenhower strategy had not changed. He would, above all, avoid “the flames of conflict.” “We seek peace,” he said, “knowing that peace is the climate of freedom. And now, as in no other age, we seek it because we have been warned, by the power of modern weapons, that peace may be the only climate possible for human life itself.” To that end, he would also seek continued prosperity for Americans and for the millions elsewhere “seeking freedom, equality, and opportunity.” Other goals, foreign and domestic, were embodied in the dual themes of peace and prosperity. Left unexplored in the Address was the great struggle of African Americans for their full civil rights, a struggle that President Eisenhower would soon be forced to push higher in the goals of the Second Administration. On January 21, 1957, however, President Eisenhower folded that and other formidable issues into his concluding prayer that Americans would someday see “the turbulence of our age yield to a true time of peace, when men and nations shall share a life that honors the dignity of each, the brotherhood of all.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
