<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Pathbreaker: The Third Inaugural Address of Franklin D. Roosevelt: by Michael Kazin</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-86" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Pathbreaker: The Third Inaugural Address of Franklin D. Roosevelt</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Michael Kazin</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The headlines reminded everyone that no other president had ever been inaugurated three times. But browsed quickly or heard on the air, Franklin D. Roosevelt’s address of just 1,380 words may have seemed to strike only familiar, if rather abstract, chords of congratulatory patriotism. He invoked the examples of Washington and Lincoln and lauded the democratic “spirit” instilled in iconic documents from the Mayflower Compact to the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution to the Gettysburg Address. That same spirit, <abbr class="initialism">FDR</abbr> claimed in a nod to the immigrants and their children who had again helped elect him, was “born in the multitudes of those who came from many lands.” He concluded with a pledge: “We do not retreat, We are not content to stand still. As Americans, we go forward, in the service of our country, by the will of God.”</p>
			<p>The address was delivered with his usual flair. Roosevelt’s moral urgency and his knack for dramatic pacing helped make him one of the greatest presidential orators. Yet, the throng that day of close to half a million appeared largely unmoved by his rhetoric, and Roosevelt later confessed his disappointment at the lukewarm reception. Arthur Krock, influential Washington Bureau Chief of the <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">New York Times</i></cite>, commented that “the spiritual tone” of the address given before a bevy of “silk-hatted politicians” and an audience shivering in 24-degree weather was “not calculated to bring forth great displays of popular enthusiasm.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></p>
			<p>However, if read closely, the speech was more a call to defend the ideals of a system faced with “great perils never before encountered” than an anodyne hymn to the nation’s past achievements. There was loose in the world that winter an evil and mighty force which the President was urging Americans to resist, even if he never named it in his speech. As he spoke, the armies of Nazi Germany and their Italian Fascist ally were occupying most of Europe. Only Great Britain, under the leadership of Prime Minister Winston Churchill, held off the totalitarian enemy, thanks to the Royal Air Force’s defeat of the German Luftwaffe the previous fall. But Adolf Hitler’s desire to conquer the island nation and its farflung empire burned as brightly as ever.</p>
			<p>A month earlier, in the wake of his third victory, Roosevelt had announced that the United States should be an "<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsenal_of_Democracy">Arsenal of Democracy</a>"—producing and selling the weapons of war to Britain and Canada. He knew a majority of Americans opposed throwing troops into the cauldron of war but also did not want Hitler and Mussolini to triumph. The impressive display of tanks and troops marching in close formation that dominated the Inaugural Parade served as a fitting response to anyone who doubted the administration’s determination to prepare the public for the sacrifices that might be required of them in the near future.</p>
			<p>And near the beginning of his speech, Roosevelt made clear that ideological combat was vital to defeating the (unnamed) menace abroad. Some men “believe that democracy, as a form of Government and a frame of life, is limited or measured by a kind of mystical and artificial fate” and that “tyranny and slavery have become the surging wave of the future.” He quickly asserted, “But we Americans know that this is not true.” <abbr class="initialism">FDR</abbr>’s boundless confidence in the “spirit” of democracy he elaborated in the rest of the short address was bounded with a warning: if citizens do not believe in their right and ability to govern themselves, they will never vanquish their sworn enemies.</p>
			<p>As with all paeans to American exceptionalism, Roosevelt’s speech was not free of hyperbole. The democratic system he claimed “enlists the full force of men’s enlightened will” did not allow most Black Americans who lived in the South then run almost exclusively by politicians from <abbr class="initialism">FDR</abbr>’s own party to enjoy the “equal protection of the laws” or to vote—both of which the Constitution guaranteed. And he made no effort to explain how democracy could be in such danger if it were, at the same time, “still spreading on every continent—for it is…in the end the most unconquerable of all forms of human society.” It is a bit odd that none of the speechwriters or the President who labored on an address that went through some six drafts noticed the contradiction.</p>
			<p>Just two weeks before, Roosevelt had delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress whose significance has always overshadowed that of the Third Inaugural. In that State of the Union Address, he warned, similarly, that “the democratic way of life is at this moment being directly assailed in every part of the world… either by arms or by secret spreading of poisonous propaganda” and called for “a swift and driving increase in our armament production.” But what made that speech so memorable was <abbr class="initialism">FDR</abbr>’s bold statement that the world could be made “secure” only if it were “founded upon four essential human freedoms”—of speech, of worship, from want, and from fear. The Four Freedoms swiftly became the equivalent of war aims for a nation that had not yet been attacked (but would be eleven months later); it rendered the inaugural address something of an anticlimax. As desires both specific and universal, they infused the “democratic spirit” with a weightier, more appealing import. Perhaps that’s one reason why the vast audience did not give <abbr class="initialism">FDR</abbr>’s speech on the 20th of January the emotional ovation he expected. They had so recently heard or read a better one dedicated to the very same end.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
