<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>"A fine man, a grand man": The First Inaugural Address of Grover Cleveland: by Mark W. Summers</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-58" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">"A fine man, a grand man": The First Inaugural Address of Grover Cleveland</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Mark W. Summers</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Prosy and free from a single memorable phrase, Cleveland’s first inaugural address was strikingly short: a thousand words less than Garfield’s, and 1,500 fewer than Benjamin Harrison’s. Perhaps that was because, rather than reading it, he memorized the whole thing and spoke it, hands clasped behind his back like an elocution student delivering a discourse. “God, what a magnificent gambler,” one Republican senator burst out.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></p>
			<p>There was nothing of the gambler in “the faithful plodder”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> who succeeded Chester Alan Arthur that March, nor in his style. His labored public documents expressed a duty-driven, sober workaholic, who had learned composition from his clergyman father and as a Buffalo lawyer had always been picked to write up obituary resolutions.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> The first Democrat elected president since before the Civil War, Cleveland was well aware of how uneasily the Republican half of America greeted the change in the White House. Its congressional delegation bulging with “Rebel brigadiers,” the Democratic party was notoriously the home for Confederate diehards and violent white supremacists. They had made a “Solid South” by intimidation and fraud, and as far as their enemies were concerned, had won only by preventing a free, fair count in the onetime slave states. Associated as the Democratic party was with Tammany Hall’s scrofulous political machine, with Irish Catholicism, and with wide-open saloons, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Samuel D. Burchard blurted out what many believed, and many others feared, that Democratic ascendancy meant a win for “rum, Romanism, and rebellion.” As New York’s reform governor and a man whose political career really began a generation after the Civil War, Cleveland had won the presidential nomination because of how little he seemed to fit that stereotype. But could the leader of a party feared as sectional and agrarian be trusted with the nation’s industrial interests? Or would he follow so many of his fellow members in the South and West in supporting a currency supply inflated with the issue of additional silver coinage and a cut in the high protective tariff that would put factory workers at the mercy of low-earners’ goods from overseas? Might his party even reopen the postwar settlement to restore what they had once boasted was “a white man’s government”?</p>
			<p>For that reassurance, Grover Cleveland did not need a long address—quite the reverse. Unlike his predecessor and successor, he would propose no laundry list of desirable legislation. Specifics were sure to stir controversy. In any case, Democrats leaned towards a cheap government that did as little as possible. Instead, the incoming president concentrated on setting a tone of safe, guarded reform under an executive determined neither to dictate to Congress nor to revolutionize the way things worked already. There would be no power-grabs like those that brought the last Democrat in the White House, Andrew Johnson, before the Senate on impeachment charges—no ambitions like those that Democrats had imputed to Ulysses S. Grant as a “Caesar” in the making. The President would maintain the 1883 Pendleton civil service law, with its hedges against any partisan scouring of the federal officeholders and its emphasis on the rewarding of merit, but not propose to widen its coverage. Unlike James Garfield, he would give no hint of tinkering with the monetary system, certainly not towards giving silver the same status as gold.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> As for the protective tariff, Cleveland went no further than to urge that the revenue system be changed to prevent so much of the nation’s money supply being locked up in Treasury vaults beyond what the government could spend, and to hint that any alterations should guard the interests of industry and wage-earners.</p>
			<p>Indeed, from the inaugural, one might easily conclude that Cleveland saw his office as purely administrative. Policy, apparently, was all Congress’s doing, and the chief executive would show “a cautious appreciation of [his] functions.” The promise to limit public spending might have meant nothing at all. Presidents always promised to see that the people’s taxes got spent responsibly and were held to the bare minimum needed. Cleveland meant it, though. Unlike Garfield, he looked askance at any national aid to public education; unlike Benjamin Harrison, he did not couple his thrifty sentiments with an endorsement of money to dredge rivers and harbors and subsidize the country’s merchant marine. Listeners could not know that the new President would go out of his way to veto bills providing relief to drought-stricken ranchers, private claims, and, most controversially, 228 individual pension bills for Union veterans whose claims he found undeserving.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> Nor could they know that within three years, Cleveland had realized that when it came to the tariff, Congress had a gift for doing nothing (quite aggressively and at endless length) and that a presidential initiative must push them towards serious downward reform. Then he showed his other side, in one newspaper’s words, rushing at “big things as unhesitatingly as a rock out of a catapult at a plate glass window, smashing them all to pieces.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> (But then, if they had known that before the 1884 election, Cleveland certainly would have lost. That was why he had dodged the issue, while the Democratic platform faced both ways at once.)</p>
			<p>At the same time, Cleveland needed to reassure Republicans that the change in the White House did not mean a Democratic ascendancy. There would be, as the Boston <i>Advertiser</i> remarked, “no backward look,” no “undoing.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> The election proved that whoever took power, the republic was in no danger. Elected by one party, the President saw himself as custodian for all the people, regardless of section or race. That his opponents allowed a smooth transition, he hinted, showed the excellence of free government—and to Democrats with bitter memories of the so-called “stolen election” of 1876, may have been the gentlest of swipes at another year when the apparent losers played nowhere so fair a game. His appeal for an end to rancor between North and South brought the loudest cheer of any in the audience. Some saw it as a rebuke to the Republican “bloody shirt” rhetoric, branding its opponents as once and future traitors; others saw it as a commitment to let the Reconstruction settlement stand, and Cleveland nailed down that impression by affirming that, however bitter past disputes had been, the emancipation and extension of rights to the freedpeople was no longer in dispute. Famous for a statement put into his mouth by another, Cleveland’s main point in his inaugural was to assert that public office was, indeed, a public trust, and not only for officers elected nationally, but at every level of government.</p>
			<p>Government “is a matter of practical acts and not of glittering generalities,” the Philadelphia <i>Press</i> complained, “and when we look through what President Cleveland says to see what he will do, we do not find it.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> A fair complaint! Though, in retrospect, vague phrases would take on weight as ponderous as the incumbent’s own. He had been conspicuously silent about appointing officers on merit alone, as civil service reformers wanted. Sure enough, most Republicans whose fixed-term ended, would have Democrats replacing them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> In the South, that meant that the many black postmasters had white successors, even if Cleveland showed himself reasonably liberal for a member of his party in occasionally nominating an African American for a prominent patronage position (which made smart politics with a Republican senate uncomfortable about drawing the white line tighter than a Democratic president did). The mainstream press did not notice how, unlike his predecessor and successor, Cleveland spent no sentences denouncing the suppression of the black vote in the South. In any case, they very likely expected that the federal enforcement laws, giving nominal protection to nonwhite voters, would fall into what the President would have called “innocuous desuetude”—as indeed they did.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a> The Democratic South could proceed towards wiping out any opposition party without the least hindrance from Washington.</p>
			<p>For labor, Cleveland offered no help, beyond calling for sterner enforcement of laws to keep “a servile class” “retaining habits and customs repugnant to our civilization” from settling in America. Nobody doubted who he meant: the Chinese, excluded under an 1882 law for ten years. The new administration would try to make the ban permanent and to prevent those who left the United States from re-entering it. Other immigrants the president had no word against, and not surprisingly. Any literacy or property requirement for newcomers would have cut deep into Democratic constituencies. So, not surprisingly, when Congress put through a literacy test, Cleveland would veto it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></p>
			<p>Cleveland’s inaugural did give hints of where his administration meant to go. On foreign policy, he called for an American presence friendly to all, allied to none. There would be no talk of countering foreign designs on the western hemisphere or negotiating commercial treaties. The emphasis on restraint may have been hinting at what a contrast he would be to the man he beat for president, James G. Blaine, whose aggressiveness in promoting American hemispheric influence earned him (not all that fairly) the nickname “Jingo Jim.” It certainly meant that the recently negotiated treaty looking to the building of an isthmian canal was no better than waste paper; by choosing the treaty’s fiercest enemy, Senator Thomas F. Bayard for Secretary of State, Cleveland made that doubly sure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></p>
			<p>Cleveland also spoke of the need for action against the land-grabbers out west. It was a promise his administration kept. Even some of his most generous campaign contributors found themselves forced to surrender lands claimed and forfeit because the conditions of the grants had gone unfulfilled.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> The President’s assertion that Native Americans should be protected and helped towards full citizenship found its realization in moves to drive squatters off their land. In 1887, the Dawes Severalty Act aiming, however defectively, towards integrating the tribes into white society had Cleveland’s support, though he rightly worried that it would strip the nation’s wards of too much of their property too quickly, however benevolently the proceeds from selling it were used.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a></p>
			<p>“Ah, sure, he’s the greatest man I ever saw,” one visitor to the White House exclaimed. “He’s a fine man—a grand man. <em>He wouldn’t promise to do one d—d thing I asked him!</em>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> The country could have done worse than Cleveland in his first term. And it did—in his second! For Cleveland’s conscience left him with no flexibility about his principles. “Had he started out in 1893 with the deliberate purpose of killing off all of the few great men in the Democratic party and then destroying it beyond hope of repair, he could not have succeeded more admirably,” a reporter commented later.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> But already, could one sense how confined the Democratic party’s concept of reform was? Conscientious, clean government Americans would get. To one partisan who chided him for slowness in advancing “the principles of the Democracy,” Cleveland snapped, “I suppose you mean that I should appoint two horse-thieves a day, instead of one.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> Nor was it necessarily a bad thing to be, in another associate’s words, “the kind of man who would rather do something badly for himself than to have somebody else do it well.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> Administrative restraint and modest promises cautiously carried out all gave the country a sense of security that it preferred and the Democrats the respectable reputation that they needed. But the problems of a country rapidly being transformed by a globalizing economy, by industrial power, and the untrammeled authority of those whose aim was democracy and had the shotguns to deliver it fatal rounds may have needed the boldness that a Cleveland could not give. Gilded Age America may not have been the gainer by a system where the president promised scarcely more than to be a good caretaker.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
