<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Return to Normalcy: The Inaugural Address of Warren G. Harding: by James D. Robenalt</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-76" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Return to Normalcy: The Inaugural Address of Warren G. Harding</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> James D. Robenalt</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“Mankind needs a benediction of understanding,” Warren Harding said on March 4, 1921, when he was sworn-in as the nation’s 29th president. “It is needed among individuals, among peoples, among governments, and it will inaugurate an era of good feeling to make the birth of a new order.”</p>
			<p>When he assumed the presidency, nothing was more important than the blessing of peace and the birth of a new order in a world torn apart by a monstrous, barbaric war and rocked by the deadliest pandemic of all time. Harding understood that grave threats remained—resumption of war, famine and starvation, worldwide Bolshevik revolution, economic collapse, and the advent of costly and endless weapons races. The disruption had been incalculable—tens of millions died in the war and fifty to a hundred million perished from the Spanish flu (675,000 in the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> alone).</p>
			<p>For the United States, these forces of chaos had been met by a leaderless national government. President Woodrow Wilson, the man who headed the executive branch, had suffered a series of debilitating strokes in September and October 1919 as he stumped the country in a desperate attempt to gain acceptance of his view of a new order—the League of Nations. His strokes left Wilson incapable of performing his job, at first physically and later emotionally. His hovering spouse, Edith Wilson, allowed few visitors to his sickroom and his condition was largely blinded to the American public.</p>
			<p>Thus, for nearly a year and a half before Harding’s inauguration, things were allowed to drift aimlessly in what was perhaps one of the most precarious times of humankind. The economy was supercharged from the war and it hit overdrive in the year following the end of the war, but then collapsed in the spring of 1920. Soldiers returning from Europe could not find jobs. Rapid inflation was followed by ruinous deflation. War taxes weighed down the economy that had to survive to save the world, prostrate from its war indebtedness.</p>
			<p>He took the oath on the East Portico of the Capitol at 1:18 <abbr class="time">p.m.</abbr> “under a brilliant sky and in a keen atmosphere,” per the <i>New York Times</i>. Woodrow Wilson rode with Harding from the White House to the Capitol, but then turned back, lacking the strength to witness the swearing-in of his successor. He was driven inauspiciously to his new home on S Street. Chief Justice Edward D. White, black-capped and gowned, a massive man, administered the oath on a Bible used by George Washington in his first inaugural. Harding had it opened to Micah 6:8, his favorite verse: “What does the <strong>LORD</strong> require of thee but to do justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly with your God?”</p>
			<p>This was the first inaugural where an electronic amplification system was employed, with speakers hidden under a huge flag in the roof of a kiosk of Corinthian architecture built on the Capitol steps for the ceremony. In previous inaugurals, one had to be within shouting distance to hear the speaker. On this day, a large crowd could hear Harding’s words in resonant tones echoing in front of the speaker’s platform.</p>
			<p>They cheered for certain lines, mainly those directed against the League of Nations and in favor of national sovereignty. “A world supergovernment is contrary to everything we cherish and can have no sanction by our Republic,” he said, drawing heavy applause according to <i>Times</i>.</p>
			<p>But Harding surprised many with speech. While he sought to protect America’s sovereignty and any decision to use its power, he was solicitous of those who believed that the United States had a sacred mission in the world. America might avoid unnecessary “entanglements” with other nations of the world, but it would not remain aloof.</p>
			<p>He built on the theme that the United States alone was the guiding example of a representative form of government, one that had selflessly thrown itself into a war to end what had devolved into a ferocious contest that threatened civilization itself. “In the beginning the Old World scoffed at our experiment,” he said. “Today our foundations of political and social belief stand unshaken, a precious inheritance to ourselves, an inspiring example of freedom and civilization to all mankind.”</p>
			<p>He warned that the United States, while it would allow no other governments to decide its fate, would not shrink from challenges to the international order: “We want to do our part in making offensive warfare so hateful that Governments and peoples who resort to it must prove the righteousness of their cause or stand as outlaws before the bar of civilization.”</p>
			<p>These warnings delivered, he turned to higher calls for associations among nations, a code word that made reservationists and irreconcilables in his party edgy. “We are ready to associate ourselves,” he declared, “with the nations of the world, great and small, for conference, for counsel; to seek the expressed views of world opinion; to recommend a way to approximate disarmament and relieve the crushing burdens of military and naval establishments.”</p>
			<p>Disarmament, in fact, would be one of the great achievements of his administration. The Washington Naval Conference he called in 1921, resulting in the world’s first arms’ limitation treaty, would lead to his nomination for the Nobel Peace Prize (unawarded in 1923 after he died, as Nobel rules discouraged posthumous honors).</p>
			<p>As importantly, he recommended the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> join the World Court, a suggestion that never came to pass because of deep isolationists sentiment in the country.</p>
			<p>Having addressed international concerns, Harding turned to his plans for the United States, recognizing that unless America put its house in order, the world could never recover from the war wreckage; indeed, events could have turned to revolution and anarchy. This task of reconstruction, he warned, was complicated and would not be easy. Burdens would fall unfairly on some. He sought the cooperation of all, management and labor. “Our people must give and take,” he pled.</p>
			<p>Two areas required immediate attention: reducing government expenditures and taxes. He avowed: “We can reduce the abnormal expenditures, and we will. We can strike at war taxation, and we must.” To accomplish these complex tasks, Harding insisted that the government had to be placed on a budget for the first time. He would create the first Bureau of the Budget, today the Office of Management and Budget. He spoke, he said, for “administrative efficiency, for lightened tax burdens, for sound commercial practices, for adequate credit facilities.”</p>
			<p>His tactics worked. After a worsening period economically, the United States recovered and helped undergird some precious measure of economic stability in the world.</p>
			<p>He welcomed women, who had voted for the first time in federal elections in 1920, into their rightful place as citizens. He addressed wounded veterans brought over from Walter Reed Hospital. “A generous country will never forget the services you rendered,” he said. His administration would create the first Veterans’ Bureau (today the Department of Veterans Affairs) to care for those wounded and maimed in the war.</p>
			<p>He even winked at a sort of New Deal concern for the unemployed and those in poverty. “Wealth is not inimical to welfare,” he observed, “it ought to be its friendliest agency.” He explained: “There can never be equality of rewards or possessions so long as the human plan contains varied talents and differing degrees of industry and thrift, but ours ought to be a country free from the blotches of distressed poverty.”</p>
			<p>Presaging Franklin Roosevelt, he pondered, “We ought to find a way to guard against the perils and penalties of unemployment.”</p>
			<p>He concluded by imploring “the favor and guidance of God in His Heaven.” Knowing his task too great for any one man, he took comfort in the fact that a hundred million Americans would share his responsibility.</p>
			<p>Returning to Micah, “to act justly, and to love mercy, and the walk humbly with thy God,” Warren Harding ended by promising, in an old-fashioned way, “This I plight to God and country.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
