<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Politician: The Second Inaugural Address of Bill Clinton, by Russell L. Riley</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-116" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Politician<br/>
				The Second Inaugural Address of Bill Clinton</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Russell L. Riley</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The historical image of Bill Clinton as president is dominated by Bill Clinton the politician. Both favorable and unfavorable accounts of Clinton’s incumbency tend to focus on his political pliancy. The upside, for those who find merit in Clinton’s ways, was a rare level of success for a Democratic president in an epoch typically unfriendly to his party at the presidential level. In the three elections before Clinton succeeded in 1992, his party had secured only 173 electoral votes in <em>total</em>, nearly one hundred short of the level needed for victory in a single cycle. Moreover, two years into his presidency, the so-called “permanent” Democratic majority in the House of Representatives fell victim to Newt Gingrich’s Republican Revolution, joining a newly Republican Senate, too. Presidential achievement in this environment, using any standard metric, is difficult. Thus Clinton’s successes, including a rare Democratic reelection and a balanced federal budget, built on an innovator’s flexibility in setting objectives and a mariner’s skill in tacking towards them. He was, by the favorable portraiture of journalist Joe Klein, “the Natural.”</p>
			<p>However, for his opponents, this adaptability was a sign that Clinton had no principles, either in matters of public business or in his private affairs. He was “Slick Willie,” spineless, unmoored to anything other than his own success. Ironically, then, Bill Clinton’s shape-shifting was, by this common characterization, at the center of both his extraordinary successes and his extreme failures as president.</p>
			<p>Clinton’s second inaugural address, however, demonstrates a flaw in this interpretation. It reveals a consistent and durable core to Bill Clinton’s approach to politics. Three familiar keywords stand out: <em>opportunity</em>, <em>responsibility</em>, and <em>community</em>. History shows that these are not casual references tossed into the speech as polite applause lines. They are instead cornerstones to a persistent philosophy of government.</p>
			<p>They appear together most prominently in Clinton’s May 1991 keynote address to the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), the centrist party organization he helped to develop in the lean decade of the 1980<abbr>s.</abbr> Bruce Reed, who would become Clinton’s White House domestic policy advisor, later observed that this “was the speech of [Clinton’s] life … and still one of the best political speeches I’ve ever seen anyone give…. [It was] pitch perfect.” Its core message? A call “to give the people a new choice … that offers <em>opportunity</em>, demands <em>responsibility</em>, gives citizens more say … —all because we recognize that we are a <em>community</em>, we are all in this together, and we are going up or down together” (emphasis added). The remainder of the speech was devoted to elaborating on each element of that triad. Then, as DLC founder Al From was to observe, these concepts were at the heart of Clinton’s presidency, buttressing his efforts to reform the national welfare system, his sense of fiscal responsibility, his embrace of free trade, and his focus on national service.</p>
			<p>These themes were demonstrably not the ephemeral product of a focus group or a tactical response to the dynamics of a single campaign season. They were, instead, the product of long and hard thought by Clinton about how his chosen party could succeed in a nation that had in five of six elections voted overwhelmingly against it.</p>
			<p>Clinton was a southerner and a Democrat. But he was not in any conventional sense a Southern Democrat. On cultural issues, especially race and gender, he was decidedly a product of the 1960s, his inclusive sensibilities whetted at Oxford and Yale. And he retained a faith in activist government that did not much survive the civil rights movement in the white South. Yet because he chose to pursue a political career in his native Arkansas, Southern Democrats dominated his world. Their reactions determined whether he would succeed or fail. Thus he learned how to lead among people who were often skeptical of his intentions. He knew they had to be brought along. <em>Opportunity, responsibility, and community</em> was an incantation, intended to help Americans accept a role for government that might not occur naturally to them.</p>
			<p>Still, it is tempting to dismiss these as mere catchwords, meaningless because they are so common in our political discourse—standards, as it were, in the Great American Songbook. But a review of all the inaugural speeches since World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> indicates otherwise. In only one address before Clinton’s time, Reagan’s second (in 1985), were all three words included—and even that instance is not a direct parallel, because Reagan spoke solely of “the responsibility <em>of the National Government</em>,” not personal responsibility in the Clintonian sense. So Clinton’s invocation was practically unique. Given that history, a second discovery is equally striking: George W. Bush included all three in his 2001 inaugural, echoing (without acknowledging the fact) Clinton on all points. For example, “America, at its best,” Bush noted, “is a place where personal responsibility is valued and expected. Encouraging responsibility is … a call to conscience.” This suggests that Clinton’s influence on his times—notwithstanding his own personal irresponsibilities—was more substantial than has been previously acknowledged, and might have persisted had the events of September 11, 2001 not completely upturned the nation’s political terrain.</p>
			<p>These notes of remarkable consistency, however, are embedded in a speech otherwise infused with great uncertainty. Clinton’s second inaugural exposes a president laboring to fathom the obscure currents of history engulfing his times and how best to respond to them. There are two components of the speech where these uncertainties are especially notable.</p>
			<p>The first is in the state of America’s foreign relations. For the previous fifty years, presidents could always fall back on Cold War-rhetoric, and the unifying mission of defeating global communism, as a consistent element of the job description. But Clinton was elected immediately after the Cold War had ended. His foreign policy team had tried fruitlessly throughout his first term to identify what would come next—a simple organizing principle that would communicate the nation’s approach to an indeterminate new era. Absent that new consensus, the 1997 inaugural address was far less concerned with foreign affairs than most since the Second World War. The term “terror” does get two quick mentions, foreshadowing a world to come. Otherwise, foreign policy gets comparatively meager attention.</p>
			<p>Second, this speech reveals a leader trying to find his own way in these uncharted waters. Clinton had always wanted to be not just a good president, but a great one. His fine grasp of American history, however, told him that the greats were mainly the product of war or some other major emergency. And he knew that he was serving in an almost uniquely peaceful era for the United States. That reality sent him on an intellectual quest—to identify a powerful example unconnected to those common kinds of crises, who in turn might be a model for the heroic presidency he wanted his to be. This search led him to Theodore Roosevelt.</p>
			<p>By Clinton’s (idiosyncratic) reading, Roosevelt drew his strength from his ability to navigate the United States successfully through the dramatic economic upheavals at the beginning of the 20th century. His use of the national government to rein in the excesses of industrial America, and to moderate the disruptive forces caused by mass relocations “from farm to factory … [and] from country to city,” were what, by Clinton’s reading, put Roosevelt on Mount Rushmore. But they also gave Clinton reason to see parallels in his own time.</p>
			<p>Theodore Roosevelt is nowhere mentioned in Clinton’s second inaugural address. But much of the speech is given over to describing a political and economic environment much like Roosevelt’s. The country was “at the edge of a new century,” an era of sweeping change. “We began the 20th century with a choice, to harness the Industrial Revolution to our values of free enterprise, conservation, and human decency. Those choices made all the difference. At the dawn of the 21st century a free people must now choose to shape the forces of the Information Age and the global society, to unleash the limitless potential of all our people…. We need a new government for a new century.” That historical predicate provided Roosevelt the foundations for presidential greatness. Perhaps it would do the same for him.</p>
			<p>It did not. Although Clinton’s second term difficulties had little to do with anything related to this address, his attempt to define the times was too abstract for most to grasp, and his claim to Roosevelt’s mantle met with a disdainful reaction as trial balloons circulated in the press. Theodore Roosevelt biographer Edmund Morris, for example, penned a dismissive op-ed for the <i>New York Times</i> pungently headed “The Rough Rider and the Easy One.” So on these grounds, the speech didn’t work. But it isn’t alone.</p>
			<p>Second inaugural addresses are notoriously difficult. Indeed some presidential speechwriters have suggested that they should be graded on a generous curve, perhaps tossing out Lincoln’s entirely to make things fair. The huge benefit inherent in most—meaning <em>first</em>—inaugural addresses is that they have all the advantages of newness, of turning the page, just months after the electorate has announced that change is exactly what it wanted. Every second inaugural address, conversely, is freighted with the weight of continuity. The excitement of a new beginning can seldom be replicated. Thus, second inaugurals are always written on unwashed blackboards: The words may be meaningful and well-constructed, but the chalk is never as vibrant as when the slate was clean.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
