<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>A Moment of Triumph Before Disaster: The Second Inaugural Address of Richard M. Nixon: by Thomas Alan Schwartz</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-102" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">A Moment of Triumph Before Disaster: The Second Inaugural Address of Richard M. Nixon</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Thomas Alan Schwartz</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Saturday, January 20, 1973, was a relatively mild day in Washington, cloudy but with no rain in the forecast. Richard Nixon’s second inaugural address took place in a very different atmosphere, both literally and figuratively, from his first one. That event, on a bitterly cold and overcast day, had brought thousands of antiwar demonstrators to Washington who hurled objects at the presidential limousine and disrupted the inaugural parade. There were a few demonstrators present in 1973, but their cause no longer seemed as relevant or urgent. A settlement in Vietnam was only days away, and Richard Nixon used his short speech to proclaim that America now stood “on the threshold of a new era of peace in the world.” Fresh off his impressive electoral triumph, carrying 49 states with a popular vote of 60 percent of the electorate, Nixon was at the peak of his political popularity and power. What is truly amazing is how quickly all of it would disappear, and Nixon would resign in disgrace less than twenty months later.</p>
			<p>With the help of his National Security Adviser, Henry Kissinger, Nixon had engineered a “trifecta” of foreign policy successes in 1972 that helped to lead to his overwhelming electoral victory. His trip to China, the first of an American president, captured the imagination of Americans, and although it lacked any substantive agreements, it gave rise to the view of Nixon as a brilliant and shrewd foreign policy leader. His subsequent summit meeting in Moscow, and the signing of the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty, seemed to signal the end of the Cold War hostility that had shaped a generation of Americans. Finally, the imminent prospect of a Vietnam peace settlement, although delayed and seemingly threatened by the renewed Christmas bombing of North Vietnam, gave Americans hope that their prisoners of war would be returned and America’s long nightmare in Indochina was finally over. To most Americans, Nixon’s claim in his inaugural that “1972 will be long remembered as the year of the greatest progress since the end of World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> toward a lasting peace in the world,” did not seem like a classic Nixon exaggeration.</p>
			<p>Having won his campaign against Senator George McGovern, a Democratic challenger whose slogan was “Come Home, America,” Nixon made it clear that the peace he sought would not bring with it a return to pre-World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> isolationism. Nixon vowed to build a “structure of peace,” in which America’s role would remain “indispensable.” However, he also made it clear that a post-Vietnam America would be cautious about using military force, and that “the time has passed when America will make every other nation’s conflict our own.” Nixon also encouraged the belief, widely shared among the public, that America would enjoy a “peace dividend,” and could now redirect its energies toward its domestic challenges, “to make life better in America—to ensure better education, better health, better housing, better transportation, [and] a cleaner environment.” Although the actual resources proved more limited than many Americans hoped, the Federal Government did begin spending far more on domestic programs in the 1970<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr></p>
			<p>Yet Nixon also sounded a more traditional Republican theme when he made the case for a more decentralized approach to decision-making, and a more limited governmental role in American life. His choice of words foreshadowed the Reagan Revolution of the 1980s when he argued, “The time has come to turn away from the condescending policies of paternalism—of ‘Washington knows best.’” Although he was not specific in terms of amounts or dollar figures, he seemed to be calling for tax cuts by saying, “Government must learn to take less from people so that people can do more for themselves.” And in what was clearly designed to be a play on the very famous closing line from John Kennedy’s inauguration—“Ask not what your country can do for you, but what you can do for your country,” Nixon said. “In the challenges we face together, let each of us ask—not just how can government help, but how can I help?”</p>
			<p>Lower taxes, limited government, less federal regulation, more individual responsibility⁠–⁠all of these arguments serve to connect Nixon’s advocacy to ongoing themes in American conservatism and to issues that the Republican Party has long embraced. There was also a specific reference to the tumultuous Vietnam period through which the country was emerging—“as America’s longest and most difficult war comes to an end”—and that still seems quite relevant to the politically polarized America of 2021. Nixon called for greater “civility and decency” in public debate, urging “each of us” to show “a new level of respect for the rights and feelings of one another, a new level of respect for individual human dignity which is the cherished birthright of every American.” In his first inaugural address, Nixon had called on Americans to “lower their voices,” but the continuation of the Vietnam War did not lead to that. Instead, Nixon had faced in his first term massive protests and political division, including the Vietnam moratoriums, the huge protests after the Cambodia invasion, and the attempt to shut down Washington in the spring of 1971.</p>
			<p>In one of the more curious passages in the speech, Nixon’s rhetoric foreshadows a theme of President Donald Trump, who recently established a President’s Advisory 1776 Commission to further “patriotic education.” Nixon contended that in recent years American children “have been taught to be ashamed of their country, ashamed of their parents, ashamed of America’s record at home and its role in the world.” In what was likely a reaction to the first wave of revisionist historical instruction in some schools, Nixon contended, “We have been beset by those who find everything wrong with America and little that is right.” Although Nixon did not use the now common expression, “American exceptionalism,” he did proclaim that America’s “record in this century has been unparalleled in the world’s history for its responsibility, for its generosity, for its creativity, and for its progress.” Closing off the speech, he returned to the theme of a “structure of peace” that would last for “generations to come,” and connected this to the forthcoming Bicentennial celebrations of the 200th anniversary of America’s founding in 1976, over which he fully expected to preside. “Let us pledge together to make these next four years the best four years in America’s history, so that on its 200th birthday America will be as young and as vital as when it began, and as bright a beacon of hope for all the world.”</p>
			<p>Richard Nixon is not a person with whom it is easy to sympathize. Listening to his voluminous tape recordings, which captured the man behind the public image he projected, it is not hard to be repelled by his cynical manipulation of issues and his crude prejudices and hatreds. Yet there is still an element of tragedy in his Presidency that is reflected in this speech. Nixon had extricated America from an unwinnable war and reconciled the country with its two giant Cold War enemies, and he clearly hoped that this would allow the country the opportunity to heal and address its numerous domestic problems. But the Watergate scandal, a reflection of some of his worst political instincts and insecurities, would soon overshadow the vision presented in this speech, and lead to his downfall. The tragedy may not be fully Shakespearean, but it is still epic.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
