<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>"One-third of a Nation...": The Second Inaugural Address of Franklin D. Roosevelt, by David M. Kennedy</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-84" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">"One-third of a Nation..."<br/>
				The Second Inaugural Address of Franklin D. Roosevelt</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> David M. Kennedy</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Franklin D. Roosevelt’s Second Inaugural Address, the first to be delivered in the newly established inaugural month of January, is one of the most richly instructive of all such addresses. Its anaphoric litany of national failings, culminating in the famous declaration about “one third of a nation ill-housed, ill-clad, ill-nourished,” has echoed down the decades. But though frequently misunderstood, not least because of that resonant passage, if read carefully the address amounts to one of the American republic’s great state papers, and bears comparison with Abraham Lincoln’s storied Second Inaugural.</p>
			<p>Like Lincoln’s in 1865, Roosevelt’s address in 1937 was a model of concision and the compelling eloquence of simple, unadorned language. Like Lincoln, Roosevelt framed his remarks around moral as well as political precepts. Most importantly, both speeches open windows into the respective presidents’ souls and their most deeply held philosophical values, even while brilliantly illuminating the transformative historical episodes of the Civil War and the Great Depression.</p>
			<p>Like many second-termers, FDR began by comparing the (improved) state of the nation on the instant occasion with the (parlous) moment when he had taken office four years earlier. Then, thirteen million workers were jobless, some twenty-five percent of the labor force; national income had plummeted to half its 1929 level; virtually all banks had shuttered their doors. On Inauguration Day in March 1933, Roosevelt had memorably begun the work of bracing up a despairing people when he intoned that “the only thing we have to fear is fear itself.” There followed the out-pouring of reforms that history knows as the New Deal. The Depression still weighed heavily on the land in 1937, but Roosevelt justifiably boasted that even as he spoke the economy was measurably recovering, while the national mood had markedly improved.</p>
			<p>But Roosevelt devoted fewer than 100 of the address’s 1,812 words to that familiar kind of self-congratulatory, political boiler-plate.</p>
			<p>Instead, he invoked a different historical reference point altogether, not the Depression’s abysmal depth in 1933, but “the one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the Constitutional Convention which made us a nation.” He then launched into an exemplary presidential civics lesson, mounting a vigorous defense not simply of his own record, but of the whole concept of the positive, activist state as a legitimate, even necessary, feature of democratic governance.</p>
			<p>Though many listeners at the time may not have fully appreciated it, Roosevelt proceeded to offer a commendably succinct summary of the critique of legacy political institutions and practices as well as laissez-faire economic nostrums that the Progressive generation of FDR’s youth had struggled to articulate. Government was not simply a necessary evil, as Thomas Paine had preached in the Revolutionary Era and generations of Americans had ritually repeated (as some still do). Democratic government, said Roosevelt, also had the “power to do good.” Like his predecessors, distant-cousin Theodore Roosevelt and scholar-in-politics Woodrow Wilson (in whose administration FDR had served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy), FDR championed the positive role of the state as the instrument of society’s collective will and citizens’ shared purposes—and as counterpoise to the enormous accretions of power that had taken root in the modern industrial economy. That aspirational notion had galvanized an earlier generation, but it was Roosevelt’s New Deal that finally brought to fruition many of the older Progressives’ ambitions for reforms like capital market regulation, secure old-age pensions, unemployment relief, protections for labor-union organization, facilitation of home ownership, electrification of the countryside, conservation of landscapes and natural resources, and huge nation-building infrastructure investments like the dams and hydroelectric installations that jump-started the economic and social modernization of the South and sparked a second westward movement into the arid regions of the United States. “The Constitution of 1787,” Roosevelt summed up, “did not make our democracy impotent.”</p>
			<p>It’s worth noting that Roosevelt cast this robust assertion of government’s proper scope in language appropriate to the substance of his argument. He used the word “we” no fewer than 70 times, “our” another 30 times, and the perpendicular pronoun “I” no more than a dozen times, five of them in the widely quoted passage about “I see one-third of a nation⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>In due course Roosevelt returned to the ambient circumstances of 1937. “Our progress out of the depression is obvious,” he said. “[W]e have come far from the days of stagnation and despair.”</p>
			<p>But then there followed one of the most remarkable statements in the annals of presidential addresses, Inaugural Addresses included, to which FDR singularly attached an exclamation point: “Such symptoms of prosperity may become portents of disaster!”</p>
			<p>One will look long and in vain for a comparable remark by any politician, anytime, anywhere. Here was a president in the very act of celebrating his electoral triumph, justifiably crowing about the progress made in his first administration. Why in the same breath would he appear to undercut that upbeat message with the highly unorthodox—even heretical—assertion that prosperity amounted to disaster?</p>
			<p>The answer to that riddle lies in the passage immediately following FDR’s extraordinary lamentation about the dangers attendant on prosperity. It was here that Roosevelt turned to the plight of the “one-third of a nation,” the “tens of millions” of Americans who were denied “what the very lowest standards of today call the necessities of life.”</p>
			<p>Casual students of the Roosevelt era might be forgiven for assuming that when the president rehearsed the fate of that suffering one-third, he was referring to the victims of the Great Depression. But a closer reading compels a different conclusion altogether. By early 1937, FDR and others believed—mistakenly, as it turned out—that the worst was behind them, that the New Deal had broken the back of the Depression and put the nation on the road to recovery. But Roosevelt knew that “our present gains were won under the pressure of more than ordinary circumstances.” The return to “normalcy,” to business as usual, might well mean returning to politics as usual, to the kind of stasis that was purpose-built into the American constitutional architecture of checks and balances. The window of opportunity might slam shut well before Roosevelt’s larger vision was fully realized.</p>
			<p>That vision was capacious indeed. “We are going to make a country,” FDR once said to Labor Secretary Frances Perkins, “in which no one is left out.” The long-excluded one-third of American citizens who were Roosevelt’s concern in 1937 conspicuously comprised rural Americans, black and white alike, as well as the enormous immigrant communities that had arrived around the turn of the century.</p>
			<p>Rexford Tugwell, a Roosevelt confidant and policy adviser, once described Roosevelt’s vision as “a better life for all Americans, and a better America to live it in. I think it was that general. There were items in it, but only a few he saw as fixed. One of these was security; if Europeans could have that, so could Americans. Another was a new framework for industrialism, and still another was a physically improved country.” Later, on the occasion of his 1944 State of the Union Address, Roosevelt elevated his vision to the level of a sweeping philosophical principle: “necessitous men are not free men,” he said, adding that “people who are hungry and out of a job are the stuff of which dictatorships are made.”</p>
			<p>It’s important to emphasize the character and reach of Roosevelt’s vision, because he is often wrongly accused of having none. Far too many accounts of Roosevelt’s presidency mistakenly argue that his program had no internal coherence, that it amounted to little more than an opportunistic hodge-podge of ill-conceived policies with no over-all pattern. But as his second Inaugural Address makes clear, his deep commitment to the positive state, and to bringing that excluded one-third of his fellow citizens into the full richness of American life, gives the lie to such gross misunderstandings.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
