<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 60</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-60" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of Benjamin Harrison</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Allan B. Spetter</h3>
			<p>Benjamin Harrison, the only grandson of a president, William Henry Harrison, to serve as president as well, understood the difficult position he faced almost from the moment he took office. He took the oath of office 100 years after George Washington did so on April 30, 1789 in New York City. Harrison would be the “centennial president” and be compared unfavorably to Washington.</p>
			<p>Furthermore Harrison had not won the popular vote. No individual would envy Harrison’s situation. Harrison, however, spoke confidently about what the nation had accomplished over the past 100 years and about the unlimited possibilities of the nation’s future. Harrison began by reviewing the remarkable movement of Americans into the vast spaces of the Great Plains in the quarter century since the end of the Civil War.</p>
			<p>He pointed out that the Dakota Territory, so large that it would be split in half and admitted to the Union as two separate states in 1889, had a larger population, estimated at between 150,000 and 200,000, than all but one, Virginia, of the 13 original states according to the census of 1790. (Virginia’s population of almost 750,000 in the census of 1790 included almost 300,000 slaves).</p>
			<p>Harrison, who fought with distinction in the Civil War and rose to the rank of brigadier general, emphasized that the end of slavery provided the south with the opportunity to participate in the tremendous growth of the nation’s industrial economy. He asked rather eloquently, “shall the prejudices and paralysis of slavery continue to hang on the skirts of progress?” He called for an improved pension program for Union soldiers and sailors and their widows and orphans. Congress would respond with the Dependent Pension Act of 1890.</p>
			<p>It has been said that Harrison tried to do more for the civil rights of African Americans than any president in the 35 years between Lincoln and Teddy Roosevelt. He appealed to the men of the south to realize that a free ballot would benefit both whites and African Americans. He expressed the continuing belief of Republicans of that era that the men who had invested to build an industrial economy in the south would accept the black man as an ally in that effort.</p>
			<p>Harrison devoted much of the rest of his Inaugural Address to his vision of the United States becoming a “great power.” To begin with, he made a very strong statement about any future canal linking the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. He said: “It is so manifestly incompatible with the precautions for our peace and safety⁠ ⁠… that a shorter waterway between our eastern and western seaboards should be dominated by any European Government.”</p>
			<p>He went on to explain the foundations of what has been called the “new empire” of the United States. Harrison said: “the necessities of our Navy require convenient coaling stations and dock and harbor privileges.” Harrison engaged in a drawn out attempt to acquire a naval base in Haiti that would protect the Atlantic side of any future canal. Although Harrison believed that Haiti had promised to turn over the base he could not make the decision to use force.</p>
			<p>Harrison tried to take the first steps toward creation of an American empire. Some scholars have suggested that the Pacific and the Asian continent should not be considered the Far East from the American perspective but the “Far west.” He reached out into the Pacific and agreed to share control of the Samoan islands with Germany. He attempted to annex Hawaii but would be thwarted by Grover Cleveland, the next president and an ardent anti-imperialist.</p>
			<p>Harrison supported an ill-fated attempt by private interests to build a canal across Nicaragua as an alternative to a canal across Panama that would be under the control of French private interests. He realized that a canal and naval bases required a modern navy. Construction of the first modern warships built of steel began in the 1880s but that handful of ships consisted only of cruisers of varying size and two vessels described as second class battleships.</p>
			<p>Harrison and his closest friend, Secretary of the Navy Benjamin Franklin Tracy, would oversee a giant leap forward for American naval power. Tracy waged an unrelenting campaign to persuade Congress to approve construction of the first three real battleships, the Indiana, the Massachusetts and the Oregon in 1890. Of more than 10,000 tons displacement, the ships would be dubbed “coastline” battleships to indicate their defensive purpose.</p>
			<p>By 1892, however, Congress would approve construction of the first “seagoing” battleship, the mighty Iowa, of 11,400 tons displacement. Congress also approved construction of several larger cruisers. Construction material moved forward from steel to armor. Tracy had lamented that the United States had only the 12th most powerful navy in the world. Harrison and Tracy put the nation on the path toward becoming the sixth largest naval power in the world.</p>
			<p>The nation seemed to fill in dramatically by the 1890s. Six new states entered the Union in 1889⁠–⁠1890: North Dakota and South Dakota, Idaho, Wyoming, Montana and Washington, more than in any other administration. The legendary historian Frederick Jackson Turner would declare in an essay written in 1893 that according to the census of 1890 the frontier had disappeared. Some Americans believed that there could be a new frontier, however, in the Pacific and even on the Asian continent.</p>
			<p>Harrison did his best to further that idea. He may have been a bit premature. If he had won a second term the United States almost certainly would have annexed Hawaii before 1898. Near the end of his Inaugural Address Harrison stated confidently, “I do not mistrust the future.” His aggressive foreign policy initiatives prepared the United States for the challenges of the 20th century.</p>
			<p>Neither Harrison nor any of his contemporaries could have imagined that the economy would plunge into the second worst depression in the nation’s history shortly after Harrison left office in 1893. The depression almost certainly resulted from too rapid expansion of the railroad system and the continuing overproduction of the agricultural sector. The economy would hit bottom in 1894 and slowly recover between 1895 and 1897.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
