<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Bully Pulpit: The Inaugural Address of Theodore Roosevelt: by Jean Yarbrough</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-68" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Bully Pulpit: The Inaugural Address of Theodore Roosevelt</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Jean Yarbrough</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Although Theodore Roosevelt served as President of the United States for seven and a half years, he delivered only one inaugural address, in 1905. Roosevelt had been tapped to serve as William McKinley’s running mate in 1900, and after McKinley’s assassination in September of the following year, Roosevelt ascended to the Presidency. He was then 42 years old, making him the youngest person ever to serve in that office. During his first term, Roosevelt was determined not to antagonize the Republican Party power brokers so as not to jeopardize his nomination for a second term. To that end, he retained the slain president’s Cabinet and hewed to his policies. But when in 1904 he won a landslide re-election, Roosevelt felt free to chart his own course.</p>
			<p>Several things stand out about Roosevelt’s 1905 inaugural address. First, he wrote it himself. It was not until the Harding Administration that presidents began to employ others to help them compose their speeches. Second, for someone whose previous Annual Messages ran to fifty or more pages and who in campaign mode was never at a loss for words, his inaugural address is surprisingly short. The entire address consists of four paragraphs, each with its distinctive theme.</p>
			<p>The theme of the first paragraph is American exceptionalism, ending with a challenge. As others before Roosevelt had noted, America was singularly blessed in laying the foundations for its experiment in republican self-government on a new and fertile continent. Unlike the nations of Europe, which had been compelled to fight against “alien races” for their very existence, the United States faced no such mortal foes. In his histories, Roosevelt had celebrated the triumphs of his countrymen over the Mexicans to the south and the French to the north, as well as their victories over the Native American tribes. But compared to the Europeans, none of these contests posed existential challenges to American survival.</p>
			<p>Americans were also exceptional because they could profit from the accumulated wisdom of the ages, but they were not weighed down by “the dead hand of a bygone civilization.” This last point is telling because although Roosevelt had praised the work of the more nationalist Founding Fathers and would continue to do so, he would find himself during his second term (and afterward) on a collision course with the principles of liberal republicanism they embraced. In this respect, Roosevelt sounded like no one as much as Thomas Jefferson, who also had inveighed against “mortmain,” insisting that “the earth belongs to the living” and that constitutions should be remade every generation to take into account the progressive character of political science. Yet, Roosevelt “cordially despised” the third President because, in his view, Jefferson’s policies had simultaneously provoked the British into attack and left the United States defenseless against it. As he had explained in his well-received first book, <cite>The Naval War of 1812</cite>, Jefferson’s reliance on citizen-militias and a defensive naval fleet had led the fledgling nation to the brink of disaster. Only in recent years had the United States begun to recover from the disastrous effect that Jefferson’s policies and misguided theories had foisted upon the new republic. Despite these egregious errors, Americans had prevailed and were now poised to take their rightful place on the world stage. The challenge facing the country at the beginning of a new century was whether America could show to the world that a free government could provide for both “the things of the body and the things of the soul.”</p>
			<p>This last phrase speaks to one of the twenty-sixth President’s most enduring themes. As a rising Republican reformer, Roosevelt had inveighed against the crass vulgarity of the Gilded Age. “Purely commercial ideals,” he warned in an 1895 essay, were “mean and sordid,” producing timid and fearful men “incapable of the thrill of generous emotion” and lacking in the capacity for heroism and greatness. “American Ideals,” he insisted, must rest on “nobler grounds” than “mere business expediency.” Although his inaugural address had referred only vaguely the “things of the soul,” Roosevelt’s aim was to turn Americans away from their preoccupation with rights, especially the soft and easy enjoyment of the property rights of the wealthy and to reorient them to their duties. Righteousness, rather than rights, would speak to these loftier spiritual needs. As his British friend, Arthur Lee Hamilton, wrote in his introduction to Roosevelt’s biography of Oliver Cromwell, Roosevelt was “essentially a preacher,” who “was not ashamed to invoke the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon.” But in keeping with the teachings of the Social Gospel, Roosevelt directed his energies toward combatting the vulgar materialism of America’s commercial ideals and fighting for a “Square Deal” for America’s working men and women.</p>
			<p>From this opening, Roosevelt moved on to foreign affairs, warning that a great nation could not afford to “shirk” its duties or shrink from its responsibilities. His policies aimed at the lofty ideal of national greatness, which required both military might and the cultivation of the manly virtues. In the inaugural address, Roosevelt confined himself to the articulation of general principles, expressing his desire for “sincere and cordial friendship” toward all nations. But in the background, his audience no doubt recalled a number of crises that arose during Roosevelt’s first term, which hit close to home. One of the key issues that emerged early in his presidency involved the application of the Monroe Doctrine. When faced with a crisis in the Dominican Republic, he announced what became known as the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine. Whereas the original doctrine had opposed territorial aggrandizement by non-American powers, under the Roosevelt Corollary, the United States would now do what it would not allow the Europeans to do: intervene in the domestic politics of other American nations to keep Europeans out. This, Roosevelt suggested, was as much to recognize the rights of our weaker southern neighbors as it was to make sure that our own interests were not threatened. “We wish peace, but we wish the peace of justice, the peace of righteousness.” His noble sentiments, however, may have been belied by his bullying treatment of Colombia in obtaining the territory on which he later oversaw construction of the Panama Canal. Looking beyond the New World of North and South America, Roosevelt’s national greatness agenda ran into trouble in the Philippines. Not all Americans were reconciled to the idea of their democratic republic extending its empire over foreign and far-away peoples.</p>
			<p>Roosevelt then turned to domestic affairs, observing that the problems Americans faced in his day could not possibly have been foreseen by “our forefathers.” When the authors of <cite>The Federalist</cite> defended the large democratic republic, they never imagined “administering the affairs of a continent.” The advent of the Industrial Revolution following the Civil War encouraged Americans to apply their initiative, energy, and self-reliance to improve their standard of living. But, he implied, the vast wealth and power generated by that revolution also produced “care and anxiety” that the architects of the commercial republic had not anticipated. Echoing the sentiments of one of his heroes, Abraham Lincoln, he warned that upon the success of the American experiment hinged not only the welfare of his countrymen but also the “welfare of mankind,” and not only for today but for “generations yet unborn.” He counseled resolve and confidence but offered no specific policies.</p>
			<p>In his final paragraph, Roosevelt returned to the theme that the problems confronting his generation were entirely novel. He urged Americans to face up to them in the same “spirit” that their forefathers had brought to their problems. In particular, he singled out “the qualities of practical intelligence, of courage, of hardihood, and endurance, and above all the power of devotion to a lofty ideal.” What he did <em>not</em> say is that he was devoted to preserving and advancing the same <em>ideals</em> as our forefathers, that is, to the protection of each individual’s inalienable rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, secured by an energetic but limited federal government. In his second term, Roosevelt would demonstrate through his policies and pronouncements that the lofty goal to which he aspired was in fact quite far removed from the ideals of the Founders he claimed most to admire.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
