<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of George Washington</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Stephen H. Browne</h3>
			<p>George Washington did not invent the inaugural address, but he did establish it as an abiding ritual of American political life. The Constitution requires no such statement: an oath of office, yes, and an annual report to Congress on the nation’s business. But of the inaugural address, nothing is said or even implied. Why then did Washington feel obliged to deliver a speech on the occasion of his assumption to office? Because the first president commanded a very keen grasp of power and how it ought to be managed on behalf of republican government. Citizens of the republic, in turn, expected power to show itself, to identify and explain the principles underwriting the office-holder’s claim to the public trust. No one, of course, was more entrusted with power at the time than George Washington. That he, of all people, should nevertheless perform such a duty tells us much about the man, the moment, and the functions of the inaugural address.</p>
			<p>On April 14, 1789, a thoroughly fatigued Charles Thomson, Secretary of the Continental Congress, dismounted in front of Mount Vernon. He then informed Washington that he had been “elected to the office of President of the United States of America.” No one, safe to say, would have been surprised at this news, least of all its illustrious recipient. Washington indeed had prepared a statement for just this occasion, and reading from it declared: “While I realize the arduous nature of the task, which is conferred on me and feel my inability to perform it, I wish there may not be reason for regretting the choice. All I can promise is only that which can be accomplished by an honest zeal.” Two days later, the president-elect, Thomson, and David Humphreys set out on a what can only be described as a republican variant on the royal procession. The journey would take them from Mount Vernon to nearby Alexandria for a brief round of toasts and speeches, and from there to Baltimore, through Delaware and into Philadelphia; thence up to Trenton, Elizabethtown, and now on barge into the Upper Harbor. On April 23, 1789, Washington debarked onto the streets of lower Manhattan amidst much noise, festivity, and collective pride. The house on Cherry Street was readied for the president’s occupation; Congress had figured out most of the protocols; and in a week’s time Federal Hall would host the new nation’s first presidential inaugural address. On the appointed day, Washington was accompanied onto the balcony by New York Chancellor Robert Livingston, who administered the oath of office. Immediately upon its completion Livingston let out “Long live George Washington, President of the United States.” Thirteen canons roared their approval, and back into the chambers stepped the chief executive of the new nation.</p>
			<p>What kind of speech might his fellow citizens expect? Washington was no orator, no Patrick Henry, and he never pretended otherwise. But whether on the fields of battle, at Mount Vernon, or in politics, he appreciated the power of language; and if Washington was not eloquent by nature, he knew how to get the best people around him to craft words for optimal effect. To this end he had enlisted Humphrey’s aid in composing the inaugural message. James Madison, taking one look at the 70-page jumble, nixed it and composed with Washington’s support a rather more precise, coherent, and compelling draft. From this document he would deliver his address before the House and Senate gathered on the second floor of Federal Hall on April 30, 1789.</p>
			<p>Just what executive power meant in the new order of things was as yet uncertain. But the new nation had fought a war in part to ensure that those who commanded such power were motivated by principles consistent with widely held ideals of republican virtue. This meant above all a regard for the public good over and above private desire. Americans wanted to be certain that the president was there for the right reasons. Washington accordingly devoted the first two of the address’ five paragraphs to assuring the people that though longing to remain at Mount Vernon, “the asylum of my declining years,” he had accepted the “summons from my Country, whose voice I can never hear but with veneration and love.” In truth Washington had little to gain in any material way from assuming the office; he needed no boost to his reputation; and he certainly had no particular taste for the tumble of politics. Washington accepted the call because it was the right thing to do. For guidance he would look to Congress and people, but ultimately “to that Almighty Being who rules over the Universe, who presides in the Council of Nations,” confident that, in the end, “No People can be bound to acknowledge and adore the invisible hand, which conducts the Affairs of men more than the People of the United States.”</p>
			<p>The assembled law makers that day would hear little in the way of specific recommendations or legislative priorities. Concerns about the military establishment, or commerce, or treaty relations with indigenous peoples, or indeed foreign policy are not even mentioned. Washington sought rather to underscore the essential tenets of republican government and the shared commitments upon which it must rest. Above all, he wished to stressed the unprecedented obligations shouldered by those gathered before him that day, this, because “the preservation of the sacred fire of liberty, and the destiny of the Republican model of Government, are justly considered as deeply, perhaps as finally staked, on the experiment entrusted to the hands of the American people.”</p>
			<p>Ensuing presidents might and did on occasion insinuate into their inaugural address particular measures. Washington for the most part chose to emphasize just those principles with which the new nation could, without contest, give their unreserved assent: “reverence for the characteristic rights of freemen, and a regard for the public harmony.” He did make it a point to remind his listeners that Article Five of the Constitution provided a preferred method for amendment, and attempted (unsuccessfully) to decline compensation. Beyond these brief comments Washington hoped only to impart such sentiments as he thought proper to the occasion, praying, finally, that the blessings of “the benign parent of the human race” may “be equally conspicuous in the enlarged views, the temperate consultations, and wise measures on which the success of this Government must depend.”</p>
			<p>Everything Washington did as president was, as he acknowledged, a precedent of some kind. The first inaugural address was no exception; the very fact that he chose to deliver it remains a lasting contribution to American civic life. That afternoon and evening, New Yorkers spilled onto the streets to celebrate, vessels in the harbor festooned their masts, guns bellowed, and troops marched. Judging from the evidence, all America seemed to rejoice. At 1,431 words it was not particularly long, nor was it especially colorful or provocative. The aim was rather to establish firmly and with utmost clarity the essential values necessary for making the republican experiment a success. In this the address might justly be said to have achieved its ends. On a personal level, the address served as a fair reflection of the man speaking: as the comte de Moustier recalled, the speech prompted “remembrances of that great man’s past services, his actual elevation, his modesty.” As a statement of political principles it extends well beyond the circumstances of the moment. More than two centuries later, the ritual of the presidential inauguration continues to function as a crucial means to republican ends.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
