<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 108</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-108" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of Ronald Reagan</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Gil Troy</h3>
			<p>In the first 105 words of his 1981 inauguration speech, Ronald Reagan painted the horizons⁠–⁠and defined the limits⁠–⁠of what would be known as the Reagan Revolution. In celebrating this “solemn and most momentous occasion” as “an orderly transfer of authority,” he rejoiced: what “we accept as normal is nothing less than a miracle.” Reagan was suggesting that the answer to America’s malaise could be found in a patriotic renewal, by returning to core principles and the irrepressible confidence that had propelled Americans forward since the American Revolution. That faith in the past as a solution to present problems and the key to a proud, prosperous, and peaceful future, is why Reagan never claimed to be launching a revolution. It was, he would say eight years later in his Farewell Address, the “Great Rediscovery: a rediscovery of our values and our common sense.”</p>
			<p>The new President had much riding on his twenty-minute address that bright, balmy January day. Americans were, he noted, “confronted with an economic affliction of great proportion,” stagflation⁠–⁠a debilitating combination of high inflation and surging unemployment. Those problems were exacerbated by an unwieldy, unproductive, and ever-growing federal government, bankrolled by “a tax system which penalizes successful achievement and keeps us from maintaining full productivity.” Beyond that, reeling from the 1960s’ and 1970s’ revolutions and disillusionments, Americans had lost faith in themselves and their government. Too many feared “that society has become too complex to be managed by self-rule.” Reagan’s predecessor Jimmy Carter unintentionally fed that crisis of confidence, with his constant emphasis on America’s new limits and his listless handling of the humiliating Iranian hostage crisis, as Iranian radicals held 52 American diplomats and marines captives for 444 days. Further adding tension and sowing doubt, were “the enemies of freedom,” especially the menace Reagan chose not to name explicitly: Soviet Communism.</p>
			<p>Finally, Reagan knew that many Americans doubted him. He had won only 50.7 percent of the vote, despite his advisers’ claim of a “Reagan mandate.” Ignoring his two-terms as California governor and nearly twenty years of political speechifying, Democrats mocked Ronald Reagan as a Hollywood B-movie actor and failed Las Vegas pitchman, who lacked a presidential cv, aura, or smarts.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless, Reagan was inviting Americans to trust him, their country, and themselves, as one, integrated, red-white-and-blue package. Splashy consumption became one colorful way to take back the night. The President’s thousand-dollar morning suit, the First Lady’s $10,000 gown, the $16 million-dollar inaugural price tag, the private planes landing at National (soon to be Reagan) Airport, the limousines deployed on the ground, all signified Reagan’s new direction. Although even some Republicans found the consumption too conspicuous, the festivities revealed a characteristically open American approach to wealth, not as something to be resented because aristocrats monopolized it, but as something accessible to be enjoyed, or at least revered. Ultimately, the celebration of wealth reflected the Reagan paradox: his odes to traditional values coexisted with his role as an avatar of American consumption, a maestro of materialism.</p>
			<p>Ronald Reagan used his inauguration and his “first hundred days,” to establish a new national tone. Proof of a collective desire for a new mood bubbled up in 1980. The national euphoria⁠–⁠and sense of vindication⁠–⁠which greeted the “Miracle on Ice,” the American Olympic team’s surprise hockey triumph over the Soviet Union in February 1980, demonstrated what the Washington Post called “hero-starved” Americans’ yearning for a return to patriotism and national “self-esteem.” Two months after the inauguration, Walter Cronkite would retire as the CBS News anchor. Reagan would replace “Uncle Walter” as the kindly paterfamilias of America’s ever-changing family. All this required, he told his fellow Americans, “our willingness to believe in ourselves and to believe in our capacity to perform great deeds.”</p>
			<p>Reagan sought to restore faith in American individualism by targeting big government. This debate had been intensifying since Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal. Democrats became the party of government expansion, as Republicans tried putting on the brakes. Anxious to preserve “this last and greatest bastion of freedom,” Reagan proclaimed: “In this present crisis, government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.”</p>
			<p>Subtly needling the Democrats, whom Republicans caricatured as the party of special interests, Reagan appealed to one “special interest group that has been too long neglected.⁠ ⁠… ‘We the people,’ this breed called Americans.”</p>
			<p>Seeing to restore the balance, Reagan insisted: “We are a nation that has a government⁠—not the other way around.”</p>
			<p>Ronald Reagan had been singing this song of limiting government and empowering Americans since the mid-1950s, when he became a pitchman for General Electric, as his Hollywood career faded. It surged with “The Speech,” his ringing endorsement of Barry Goldwater in 1964. And it echoed in many of his riffs as California governor and on the speakers’ circuit as he built toward his 1976, then 1980, presidential runs. He had no “intention to do away with government,” he insisted. He just wanted “to make it work⁠—work with us, not over us; to stand by our side, not ride on our back.”</p>
			<p>Reaffiming his faith in “freedom” and “the dignity of the individual,” he insisted that “our present troubles parallel and are proportionate to the intervention and intrusion in our lives that result from unnecessary and excessive growth of government.” Then, one of Reagan’s defining lines: “It is time for us to realize that we are too great a nation to limit ourselves to small dreams.”</p>
			<p>Leaping from the political realm to the existential, he rhapsodized: “let us begin an era of national renewal.” Seeing heroes as walking bundles of hope, Reagan saluted “individuals and families whose taxes support the Government and whose voluntary gifts support church, charity, culture, art, and education.” And after honoring the American Revolution, warning “those who practice terrorism and prey upon their neighbors,” and toasting Inauguration Day as a “day of prayer,” he turned toward his home, to the West.</p>
			<p>Noting that the ceremony had never been held on the West front of the Capitol, he saluted the men behind the monuments he now faced: George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln. Looking toward “the sloping hills of Arlington National Cemetery” across from the Potomac, he honored America’s soldiers who had sacrificed everything so we could enjoy our freedom. “Under one such marker lies a young man⁠—Martin Treptow,” he said. Treptow died in World War I. In his diary he wrote: “I will fight cheerfully and do my utmost, as if the issue of the whole struggle depended on me alone.”</p>
			<p>Reagan ended by summoning “our best effort, and our willingness to believe in ourselves and to believe in our capacity to perform great deeds; to believe that together, with God’s help, we can and will resolve the problems which now confront us.” Dismissing the cynics, he declared: “And, after all, why shouldn’t we believe that? We are Americans. God bless you, and thank you.”</p>
			<p>Naysayers would note that Treptow wasn’t buried in Arlington National Cemetery⁠–⁠although the phrase “one such marker” could apply to any military gravesite anywhere in the world. But believers⁠–⁠and the newly-converted⁠–⁠delighted in the next triumphal few minutes. Striding into the President’s Room of the Senate, Reagan signed an Executive Order freezing federal civilian hiring. “This begins the process of restoring our economic strength and returning the Nation to prosperity,” he said.</p>
			<p>As the inaugural luncheon in Statuary Hall ended, Reagan announced the perfect coda to his red, white, and blue inaugural: “With thanks to Almighty God, I have been given a tag line, the get-off line everyone wants at the end of a toast or speech,” the shameless showman admitted. The hostages “now are free of Iran.” Ayatollah Khomeini had given the old performer a great gift to help “begin an era of national renewal.”</p>
			<p>After a shrewd courtesy visit to the Speaker of the House, Tip O’Neill⁠–⁠who felt snubbed by his fellow Democratic Jimmy Carter at the 1977 inauguration⁠—Reagan rode down Pennsylvania Avenue to his new home. The inaugural parade celebrated the themes of the inaugural⁠–⁠and the three pillars on which Ronald Reagan’s historical reputation still stands: peace, prosperity, and patriotism.</p>
			<p>He promised all three in his 20-minute talk. Eight rocky years later, he was able to make the case that he delivered all three⁠–⁠at least partially. With the Soviet Union imploding, the Cold War was ending. The stock market was booming and inflation had faded. Meanwhile, the celebration of traditional American values Reagan launched in the inaugural, continued.</p>
			<p>True, various problems persisted. Debates about Reagan’s legacy continue to rage among historians. But there’s a clear line between the vision he articulated in 1981, and the case he made emphasizing his successes eight years later. And, as he would say in his Farewell Address in his folksy, aw shucks way, looking back on his administration, and his first inauguration: “All in all, not bad. Not bad at all.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
