<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>"A New Birth of Freedom": The First Inaugural Address of Barack Obama, by Tracy Denean Sharpley-Whiting</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-122" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">"A New Birth of Freedom"<br/>
				The First Inaugural Address of Barack Obama</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Tracy Denean Sharpley-Whiting</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Barack Obama’s speeches in the run-up to his inauguration in January 2009 were a brew of soaring oration, Aristotelian rhetoric, and elements of the Black Jeremiad. Authors such as Frederick Douglass, with his “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” (1852), Martin Luther King, Jr.’s “The Other America”—delivered at Stanford University in 1967—James Baldwin’s epistolary <i>The Fire Next Time</i>, and Jeremiah Wright’s social gospel-infused sermons were parts of a canon of literature and performance that gave intellectual form and substance to Obama’s oratorical stylings and rhetorical grace. His campaign had used variations of a hope and change motto, while the candidate himself embodied a multiracial America, brimming with expectancy and possibility. And yet, his first inaugural address was decidedly understated. Barack Obama appeared to have taken clearer-eyed stock of the moment.</p>
			<p>On Tuesday, January 20th, besides his inauguration, the nation was also celebrating the 200th year anniversary of the birth of America’s 16th president, Abraham Lincoln. Lincoln, the Great Emancipator and uniter in post-Civil War America, had always figured centrally as a point of political comparison and emulation for the Democratic president-elect. Lincoln’s Springfield, Illinois was where both he and then Senator Obama served as state lawmakers and where the late Republican president delivered his 1858 “A House Divided” speech. And Springfield, rather than his adopted hometown of Chicago, was also where Barack Obama announced his candidacy for the presidency. As Lincoln had in 1858 as well as in his two subsequent inaugural addresses of 1861 and 1865, Obama’s first inaugural address similarly broached the themes of unity, war, healing, reconciliation, and rebirth. Despite his having garnered over 65,000,00 votes, the most in a presidential election at that time, an electoral college rout of 365 votes, and an approval rating of 67% that January, America’s house at the start of 2009 was ablaze and surreptitious partisan chicanery was afoot. He would need to rally the nation after a hard-fought and won election, remind them of the guiding principle of <i>E pluribus unum</i>.</p>
			<p>Before taking the podium, Obama took a commemorative train ride from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania to Washington, <abbr class="initialism">D.C.</abbr> in honor of Lincoln. Philadelphia, “The City of Brotherly Love,” had also played host to Obama’s campaign-saving speech on race: “A More Perfect Union.” In many respects, his first inaugural address picked up where “A More Perfect Union” left off. America’s 44th president, a mixed-race man who identifies as African American, understood his journey as improbable when he offered that his “father less than 60 years ago might not have been served in the local restaurant.” But there he was now “stand[ing] before you to take a most sacred oath” on “this magnificent mall” with “men and women and children of every race and every faith⁠ ⁠… every language and culture, drawn from every end of this Earth.⁠ ⁠… Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus, and non-believers.” That what was improbable became possible is, for Obama, a uniquely American story, “the meaning of our liberty and creed.” The American experiment of democracy is necessarily bound up with this braided history. In his recounting of the diversity of the American experience, of those who “traveled across oceans in search of a new life⁠ ⁠… toiled in sweatshops, and settled the West, endured the lash of the whip, and plowed the hard earth,” one hears echoes of Langston Hughes’s “I Too Sing America” and Walt Whitman’s “I Hear America Singing.” And in a few subtle rhetorical moves, he makes short work of the oversimplified idea of America as a Christian nation of voluntary immigrants. Barack Obama is only the second president in an inaugural address to concede the “peculiar and powerful interest,” as Lincoln so eloquently remarked in his second inaugural address, of enslaved Blacks as involuntary arrivals on America’s shores at its founding. He is also the only president to recognize atheists and agnostics alike in an inaugural address.</p>
			<p>Obama had inherited a nation at a bleak crossroads, “amidst gathering clouds and raging storms.” His lesson on our “patchwork heritage” as a signal call to unity, as a benchmark of “our strength,” was the address’s prelude to realism, his ticking off of the dire predicament the country had now found itself. America was enmeshed in two seemingly never-ending wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the latter of which he had given a full-throated denunciation of as a “dumb war” in 2002 as a junior Senator from Illinois. Rejecting as “false the choice between our safety and our ideals”.⁠ ⁠… “the rule of law and rights of man,” Obama argued that “our security” emanates from “the justness of our cause.” Unapologetic with respect to America’s “way of life” and unwavering in “its defense,” he was nonetheless unsparing in his criticism of the previous administration’s squandering of America’s resources and use of “power” as unaligned with “the justness of our cause” and “the tempering qualities of humility and restraint.” If wars abroad proved fiscally imprudent and morally dubious, “greed and irresponsibility” ravaged the domestic economy whose automotive, banking and other financial institutions were on the brink of collapse. Failing schools and “[t]oo costly” healthcare rounded out the new president’s litany of indicators of crises. The indices pointed to a “nagging fear that America’s decline is inevitable.”</p>
			<p>Obama demanded Americans marshal their collective strength. In looking backward, he cast the war over slavery and session and its deleterious aftermath of segregation as one of America’s greatest challenges. For having “tasted the bitter swill of Civil War and segregation,” a rebirthed nation “emerged from that dark chapter stronger and more united,” he assured his audience. Obama walks his listeners even further back in America’s history to its birth where “patriots huddled on the shores of an icy river,” while “the enemy advance[ed]” as evidence of Americans strength and solidarity. Here he turned to progressive pamphleteer, Thomas Paine, whose inspirational words General George Washington would have read to his soldiers: “Let it be told to the future world⁠ ⁠… that in the depth of winter, when nothing but hope and virtue could survive⁠ ⁠… that the city and the country, alarmed at one common danger, came forth to meet [it].”</p>
			<p>Given the hardships overcome during these watershed moments in American history, Obama understood that Americans could once again rise to these new challenges by leaning into the values of “honesty and hard work, courage and fair play, tolerance and curiosity, loyalty and patriotism.⁠ ⁠… [which] have been the quiet force of progress throughout our history.” American exceptionalism, first articulated by Thomas Jefferson, is the sinewy thread throughout the address. And it is this exceptionalism that will compel Americans to “set aside childish things” that “strangled our politics” and sowed division. If American exceptionalism is the thread, then an indivisible America, not a red or a blue America, a theme that resonated throughout his campaign for the presidency, is the needle. Threading the needle, Obama forecasts to the global community that America will be “ready to lead once more.”</p>
			<p>“This election,” he argued, represented a pivot in the American mind, the choosing of “hope over fear,” “unity of purpose over conflict and discord.” But Barack Obama’s election also ushered in a new and premature way of thinking about America as postracial. Celebrated as the realization of a dream deferred, the actualization of our democratic ideals in practice, postracial America was but a fever dream ripe for the breaking. Reveling in America’s promise and progress, “gathering clouds” were already on the horizon and swollen to bursting with the emergence of the Tea Party and an era of white grievances and tribalism.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
