<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 56</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-56" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Address Upon Assuming the Office of President of the United States</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Walter T. K. Nugent</h3>
			<p>As the election of 1880 drew near, the Republicans⁠–⁠dominant in presidential elections since 1860 but not lately in congressional contests⁠–⁠were divided into two large factions: the Stalwarts and the Half-Breeds. The Stalwarts hoped to nominate former president Ulysses S. Grant, whom they believed was a sure winner. But Grant had already served two full terms (1869⁠–⁠1877), and he was diffident about running again. The Half-Breeds were eager, both to capture the nomination and the election. Grant’s delegate votes stalled on the thirty-fourth ballot. The leader of the Half-Breeds, Senator James G. Blaine of Maine, was in second place but could not pull into the lead. The nomination soon went to a dark horse, long-term congressman James A. Garfield of Ohio.</p>
			<p>The convention, for party unity’s sake, then turned to a Stalwart for the Vice-presidential nomination: Chester Alan Arthur of New York, an ally of the Stalwart leader, Senator Roscoe Conkling. Arthur was a Vermont-born New York City lawyer, known for his high-fashion dandified attire. He had also been a solid Republican since the late 1850s and was noted for two cases in which he successfully defended African-Americans, one a woman prevented from riding on the city’s public transit and the other a slave who claimed freedom after his owner brought him to New York. In 1871, President Grant appointed Arthur the Collector of the Port of New York, the most lucrative patronage job in the federal system overseeing a staff of a thousand at the Customs House. Arthur held this position until President Hayes, in a burst of reform zeal (which Arthur was then scarcely noted for), fired him in 1878. But by 1880, Hayes was without much influence, and Arthur was a Conkling ally. In the presidential election, Garfield and Arthur squeaked by the Democratic candidates, General Winfield Scott Hancock and Indiana congressman William English, by only 33,000 votes out of 8.86 million cast.</p>
			<p>Garfield and Arthur swore their oaths of office on March 4, 1881. Garfield filled his cabinet with party leaders and faithful, with the eminent Blaine as Secretary of State. But not quite four months later, on July 2, Charles Guiteau, who has gone down in history as “a disappointed office seeker,” shot Garfield in the back and arm. The president lingered two and a half months. Physicians, as yet unaware of antisepsis, tried to dig out the bullet, but gave Garfield blood poisoning which, together with a weakened heart and other problems, killed him on September 19. Garfield had had little time to accomplish much. He had advocated civil service reform, but that and other ideas had to await his successor. Arthur took the presidential oath at his New York residence in the wee hours of the next day. He would serve out nearly a full term until March 1885.</p>
			<p>Arthur did not have a formal inauguration nor a true inaugural address. But he did transmit his “Address upon assuming the Office of President” almost immediately, on September 22, 1881. Hardly any of it touched on policy or gave an indication of any legislation hr might propose. As the document shows, Arthur promised to “profit by his [Garfield’s] example and experience” and strive “to correct abuses, to enforce economy, to advance prosperity, and to promote the general welfare⁠ ⁠… ensure domestic security and maintain friendly and honorable relations with the nations of the earth.” Hardly radical, even anodyne. His aim, evidently, was to reassure the people that the road ahead would be smooth. “No demand for speedy legislation has been heard, “ no “unusual session of Congress” is occasioned.</p>
			<p>Nonetheless, Arthur and his administration did achieve a number of things, which together form a more activist federal government⁠–⁠not a lot more, but visibly more⁠–⁠than the Hayes administration that preceded him. In less than three months after taking over, the entrepreneurial Blaine resigned, leaving foreign policy more clearly in Arthur’s hands. Nearly all of Garfield’s cabinet members would be replaced within a year. In early 1882, Congress passed two acts that restricted rights rather than extending them: In March 1882, the Edmunds Act, outlawing polygamy, an anti-Mormon measure; and in May 1882, the Chinese Exclusion Act, cutting off migration from China for ten years. (Arthur had vetoed a bill a few days earlier because its exclusion period was twenty years, but he signed the revised one. In 1892 and later, exclusion would be extended permanently.)</p>
			<p>In the fall of 1882, Congress argued about civil service reform. The issue had come up in Hayes’ time, and pressure mounted for some form of action. First the Senate, and then the House, passed the Pendleton Civil Service Act in late 1882, and Arthur signed it into law on January 16, 1883. It is the one achievement for which the Arthur Administration is best⁠–⁠or at all⁠–⁠known for, mentioned in virtually every subsequent textbook of post-Civil War American history. Many have remarked on the apparent incongruity of Arthur, a preeminent spoilsman of the 1870s, signing the first broad act to limit or replace the spoils system with competitive merit examinations for holding office.</p>
			<p>The spring of 1883 also brought a revision of the tariff, though levels changed very little as interests competed for protection. The act became known as the “mongrel tariff,” and it finally passed in December. Arthur also signed a generous bill to expand appropriations for the U.S. Navy, which he regarded as under strength. In so doing, he built a reputation as an expansionist, if not an imperialist. Another naval bill the next year cemented that reputation. So did the United States’ acquisition in 1884 of Pearl Harbor, in Hawaii, as a coaling station for American vessels.</p>
			<p>Under Arthur’s watch, the United States in 1884 became a signatory to the International treaty establishing standard time, with a line running through the Greenwich Observatory in London as the “prime meridian.” In pre-railroad days, time zones were unknown and unnecessary. But by the 1880s, different railroad lines had run on different schedules, with sometimes lethal results. The standardization of time, into four zones across the United States, was an essential safety measure and an achievement of the Arthur years. The final significant legislation signed by Arthur was the Foran Act, outlawing contract labor, in February 1885.</p>
			<p>Did his actions conform to, or reflect, his initial address (see above)? Vague as those were, he could hardly have missed. The civil service act did correct abuses, the tariff could be claimed to have advanced prosperity, and the naval appropriations ensured security, in its way.</p>
			<p>By early 1885, Arthur had unsuccessfully sought renomination. Blaine became the Republican candidate for president in the 1884 election, only to be defeated by the Democrat, New York governor Grover Cleveland, by about as narrow a margin ad Garfield and Arthur had managed in 1880.</p>
			<p>Arthur’s nearly four years in office were certainly not devoid of achievements, and the Pendleton Act was by no means the only one. Arthur became president only sixteen years after the end of the Civil War, and he left the office only sixteen years before the accession of Theodore Roosevelt and the onset of full-blown Progressive reform. In Arthur’s day, Jim Crow had not yet grown into its full malign maturity, but already many KKK atrocities and other terrorism were wreaked upon the former slaves. The Army and settlers continued to push back Indians from their tribal lands. Civil War issues and loyalties persisted strongly, in the South, in Supreme Court decisions, in the election of former Confederates to Congress and other offices. On the other hand, and looking forward, the Arthur presidency produced glimmerings of the kind of reforms that would soon mark the full-blown Progressive Era. Historians have traditionally called the years from the Civil War to World War I as “the Gilded Age and Progressive Era,” but were they so different, stodgy and corrupt on the early side, enlightened and filled with reform on the later? It’s not quite that simple. Many changes that we might think of as “progressive” really began in the so-called Gilded Age, the 1870s through the 1890s. But some of the actions that Arthur and the Congresses of his day give off more than a whiff of “Progressivism.” The more restrictive and, by today’s standards, illiberal side of Progressivism was manifest in the Chinese Exclusion Act and the Edmunds Anti-Polygamy law. Yet the more liberal kind of Progressivism was at the core of the Pendleton Civil Service Act, and the imperialism of Theodore Roosevelt was of a kind with Arthur’s naval up-grading and the franchise on Pearl Harbor.</p>
			<p>All in all, Arthur and his Administration compiled not a bad record of achievements in those three and a half years, starting with the shock of Garfield’s assassination. It was an honorable and incorrupt record. Throughout those years, Arthur suffered from Bright’s disease⁠–⁠the modern name is glomerulonephritis⁠–⁠and he died of it about a year after he left the White House.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
