<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Corrupt Bargain: The Inaugural Address of John Quincy Adams: by C. James Taylor</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Corrupt Bargain: The Inaugural Address of John Quincy Adams</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> C. James Taylor</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>No person came to the presidency with a better résumé than John Quincy Adams. A native of Massachusetts, like his father, President John Adams, he was a nationalist. He spent most of his adult life in public service, as a senator, a diplomat in several European capitals, and as Secretary of State for almost eight years. In his limited time as a private citizen, he practiced law and held a professorship at Harvard. Adams enjoyed life-long interests in education, science, and the arts. The presidency, the ultimate capstone for most American political careers, proved to be merely an interlude for him. After a brief post-presidential sabbatical, he returned to public life as a congressman.</p>
			<p>Adams carefully prepared his inaugural address and sent a copy to the press two days before the event. Late on the eve of his inauguration, he received and corrected the proof copy that would appear in a special edition of the <i>National Intelligencer</i> the next day. According to his diary, he had two sleepless nights before delivering the address. Added to the natural anxiety of the day, his wife was ill. She did not attend the ceremony.</p>
			<p>He launched the address with a brief overview of the growth and success of the nation since the ratification of the Constitution. A territory once bounded by the Mississippi River, now “extended from sea to sea.” The new lands were not taken through conquest, but acquired by treaty or purchase. And, rather than subservient colonial status, the people in the new territories participated in the same rights and duties as citizens in the original states. Such was “our condition under a Constitution founded upon the republican principle of equal rights.”</p>
			<p>However, he noted that “From evil⁠—physical, moral, and political⁠—it is not our claim to be exempt.” Almost at the moment of its’ founding, the nation suffered “a collision of sentiments and sympathies which kindled all the passions and imbittered the conflict of parties.” Sectional differences and disagreements over the proper response to the French Revolution and subsequent European wars created a twenty-five-year period of political unrest that ended with the War of 1812 and the presidency of James Monroe. Now that political calm seemed to have returned, Adams didn’t use the popular term “Era of Good Feelings” but did recognize that “this baneful weed of party strife was uprooted.” Understanding what had brought the country to this relatively tranquil point, Americans could now “indulge in grateful exultation and cheering hope.”</p>
			<p>He reviewed the “promise and performance” of the Monroe administration, and stated that “to pursue their consummation⁠ ⁠… will embrace the whole sphere of my obligations.” In foreign affairs, he highlighted the peaceful expansion of the national boundaries and recognition of the independence of countries in the southern hemisphere from European colonial control. In the domestic realm he listed reduction of the national debt, reorganization of the postwar army, improvements in the nation’s fortifications and navy, suppression of the African slave trade, and the encouragement of the native American population to evolve from hunters to farmers as accomplishments during Monroe’s two terms. Internal improvements “emphatically urged by him [Monroe] at his inauguration” but still lagging, was the issue Adams embraced in his address. He acknowledged that “some diversity of opinion has prevailed with regard to the powers of Congress for legislation upon subjects of this nature.” He offered “the most respectful deference” to those who held constitutional objections to federally funded internal improvements. But, the benefits of these public works he predicted would mean that “all constitutional objects will ultimately be removed.” He offered Roman roads and aqueducts as examples of the lasting importance of a nation’s investment in internal improvements. As a nationalist, interstate communication and transportation would be an essential element in reducing sectionalism.</p>
			<p>He concluded the address recognizing that he owed his position to “the peculiar circumstances of the recent election.” He had finished second to Andrew Jackson in both the popular and electoral votes. Because the vote was divided among four candidates, no one received the necessary majority and the decision fell to the House of Representatives where Adams emerged the victor. In the days leading to the vote in the House, he received warnings and threats of organized opposition and even civil war if Jackson failed to gain the majority. {Diary 1⁠–⁠29-1825}. After the vote, Jackson supporters condemned the apparent collusion between Adams and the fourth-place finisher, Henry Clay, as a “corrupt bargain.” Adams appealed to his auditors that “less possessed of your confidence in advance than any of my predecessors” he needed their “indulgence.”</p>
			<p>The address, for the most part, sought recognition of the Americans’ common history and recent apparent tranquility during the Monroe administration. By extolling the nation’s founders, “those illustrious benefactors of their age,” he appealed to all the people. The address was conciliatory and suited to the moment. He would attempt to avoid all sectional and partisan conflict. In this he would fail and a second party system would evolve during his administration. Where he did succeed, at least moderately, was in pushing forward with the internal improvements. However, his commitment to internal improvements further angered the Jacksonians and intensified the growing partisanship.</p>
			<p>If Adams had been elected with less controversy, the address certainly would have been more forceful and specific. His December 6, 1825, annual address to Congress is more often cited and recognized as representative of his vision for the nation. Among other things, he called for additional reciprocal agreements with European countries to improve commerce. He noted that the United States had accepted an invitation to a congress of American countries to be held in Central America. He listed advances being made in “surveying, marking and laying out roads” throughout the states and territories, including a continuation of the Cumberland road. In this address, Adams called for a national university, a national astronomical observatory, and government supported exploration of the Northwest coast. The partisan animosity that grew out of the contested election, and caused him to be cautious in his inaugural address, never subsided during his term.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
