<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Old Hickory: The Second Inaugural Address of Andrew Jackson: by Thomas Coens</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Old Hickory: The Second Inaugural Address of Andrew Jackson</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Thomas Coens</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>On March 4, 1833, shortly after twelve noon, Andrew Jackson took the oath of office for the second time in the Capitol’s Hall of Representatives. The ceremony had been slated for the Capitol’s East Portico, but a recent snowfall and sub-freezing temperatures forced the event indoors. The Hall’s tight quarters limited spectators, but there was room enough to accommodate Jackson’s Cabinet, Supreme Court judges, Senators and congressmen, foreign ministers, and Washington, <abbr class="postal">DC</abbr>’s mayor, as well as what the newspapers called a sizable “concourse of ladies and citizens.” Standing before the Speaker’s chair and flanked to his left by newly elected vice president, Martin Van Buren, and to his right by his nephew and private secretary Andrew Jackson Donelson, Jackson delivered his second inaugural “in an audible and firm voice.” The address was cheered by the audience, after which Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall approached Jackson and administered him the presidential oath.</p>
			<p>Jackson began his address by thanking his countrymen for his reelection and the “renewed expression of their confidence in my good intentions,” and concluded with a “fervent prayer to that Almighty Being before whom I now stand, and who has kept us in His hands from the infancy of our Republic to the present day.” In between, Jackson devoted almost the entirety of his second inaugural to outlining, in very general terms, what he considered the “two objects which especially deserve the attention of the people,” namely, “the preservation of the rights of the several States and the integrity of the Union.” On the one hand, Jackson emphasized the importance of safe-guarding the constitutionally protected prerogatives of state governments. The “destruction of our State governments,” Jackson warned, “or the annihilation of their control over the local concerns of the people would lead directly to revolution and anarchy, and finally to despotism and military domination.” At the same time, Jackson encouraged Americans to cherish the federal Union and to give “a liberal support of the General Government in the exercise of its just powers.” “Without union our independence and liberty would never have been achieved,” Jackson reminded Americans, and hollowing out of the authority of the federal government risked economic chaos, constant strife and bickering, civil war, and, ultimately “loss of liberty.”</p>
			<p>Perhaps the most notable feature of Jackson’s second inaugural was how short it was. At 1,176 words, only seven inaugural addresses have been shorter, and one of those was Jackson’s first, given in 1829. Virtually everyone who heard or read the address and commented upon it noted its slimness. John Quincy Adams, who was not present at the ceremony but received a first-hand report, described it as “brief and full of smooth professions,” while fellow diarist Philip Hone noted that it was “well done, not too long.” By contemporary as well as modern standards, Old Hickory was a rather infrequent public speaker, and it is not a stretch to suggest that the brevity of Jackson’s two inaugurals was no accident. Despite his reputation as the father of “Jacksonian Democracy,” with all its boisterous electioneering, Jackson rarely appealed to voters in person, and he limited his communications with the public to written exchanges published in newspapers, and, as president, to State Papers and messages to Congress. This was in keeping with the patrician practices of his predecessors, but Jackson’s aversion to public speaking and self-promotion went beyond even theirs. In fact, other than remarks he delivered at an 1833 monument cornerstone laying ceremony honoring George Washington’s mother, Jackson did not once formally address a public audience during his eight years as president.</p>
			<p>The other noticeable thing about Jackson’s second inaugural is how lacking it was in specific references to concrete events or policies. Newspapers opposed to Jackson complained, with some justification, that it contained “no allusion to debatable matter,” and was filled with “generalities and non-committals” with which “none will be found to disagree.” It is not true, however, that Jackson’s address had nothing to say about the important issues of the day, even if what he said was stated so obliquely as to require listeners to read between the lines. As with many a presidential inaugural, Jackson’s second addressed contemporary political conflicts without mentioning them by name.</p>
			<p>Near the end of his inaugural, Jackson dropped several hints that his reflections on states’ rights and federal power were not to be taken as abstract musings, but as commentary on recent events and his handling of them. In the address’s third to last paragraph, Jackson referred to the “existing crisis” and the “dangers which surround” the country, and he expressed his hope that the nation could pass through them by exercising “forbearance and firmness.” The “crisis” facing the country, as Jackson’s audience would have immediately known, was Nullification. In November 1832, a South Carolina convention, claiming to act in the name of that state’s people, declared void, or “nullified,” two federal laws raising tariff rates on imports, measures the convention believed to be unconstitutional and unfair on the grounds that they made Southerners pay more for imports while getting less for their agricultural exports. The South Carolina convention also warned that the State would secede from the Union if an attempt was made to enforce those laws within South Carolina’s borders. Jackson met South Carolina’s provocation with a fiery December 1832 proclamation denouncing nullification and secession as unconstitutional and reckless. The means to defuse the crisis, however, came from Congress, which during the 1832⁠––33 session passed a so-called “Compromise” tariff law that gradually reduced rates over the coming years until they came down to levels thought to be acceptable to Southerners. Jackson had signed the measure into law only two days earlier, and whether South Carolina would back down⁠—it did, more or less⁠—was on Inauguration Day yet unknown.</p>
			<p>Four drafts of Jackson’s second inaugural survive in the Library of Congress’s collection of Jackson Papers, and an examination of those drafts reveals that the decision to address Nullification with kid gloves, or at least indirectly, had been internally debated by Jackson and his aides during the address’s drafting process. Jackson’s first draft, written out in his own hand, reads like a slightly shorter, slightly less eloquent version of the final address. Jackson’s “Kitchen Cabinet” advisor Amos Kendall took Jackson’s first draft and lengthened and revised it. As the former Kentucky newspaper editor was wont to do, Kendall added to Jackson’s draft a fair measure of piquancy and punch. Kendall’s revision castigated nullifiers as “misguided men,” suffering from “madness or delusion,” and had Jackson dramatically vow to “<i>preserve the union of these states although it may cost me my life</i>.” Jackson’s dutifully copied over Kendall’s provocative comments into a third draft, but they were removed in the final draft executed by his nephew and secretary Andrew Jackson Donelson. Who was responsible for doing so is not known; given the rapid and peaceful abatement of the Nullification crisis in the weeks following, it is no doubt best that they were.</p>
			<p>Also lurking beneath the generalizations of Jackson’s second inaugural was Old Hickory’s famous “War” against the Bank of the United States. Jackson had won reelection in 1832 over opponent Henry Clay by campaigning under the banner of his 1832 veto of legislation rechartering the Bank of the United States, a semi-private, semi-public institution Jackson felt to be unconstitutional, aristocratic, and dangerous. With his Bank Veto as the unmistakable subtext, Jackson in his second inaugural touted his willingness to “exercise my constitutional powers in arresting measures which may directly or indirectly encroach upon the rights of the States, or tend to consolidate all political power in the General Government.”</p>
			<p>Seen this way, Jackson’s second inaugural can be read as a justification of his dual decisions, made during his first term, to wage war against the Bank and against Nullification. The two, each in their own way, violated his middle-of-the-road approach to states’ rights and federal power: the Bank was born of federal overreach and threatened to overawe the States and State-chartered banks; while Nullification took states’ rights too far, diminishing the legitimate powers of the federal government and jeopardizing the very existence of the Union.</p>
			<p>It is fair, however, to ask whether this is an accurate description of how Jackson really operated. Did Jackson go after the Bank and after Nullification because of his constitutional scruples, or were constitutional scruples invoked as plausible cover for other, more decisive motivations? Critics of Jackson, both then and in the years since, have caricatured Jackson as someone who “shot from the hip,” and made decisions, not on the basis of political principles, but to indulge personal vendettas and fits of pique. Jackson’s first serious biographer (and not much of a fan), James Parton, famously wrote in 1860 that Jackson was at heart “a fighting man, and little more than a fighting man⁠ ⁠… [he hated] nullification much, but Calhoun more⁠ ⁠… the bank much, but Biddle more. He was a thorough-going human fighting-cock.” Documentary evidence, much of it only unearthed in the last few decades by editors of Jackson’s presidential papers, suggests that Parton’s take on Jackson is largely incorrect. Jackson began drafting closely reasoned arguments against the Bank’s constitutionality early in his first term, and he was heavily involved in drafting the parts of his 1832 nullification proclamation that denounced secession. Such evidence does not forbid us from wondering whether Jackson’s constitutional scruples were ultimately good rather than real reasons for his actions, but it is simply not true that Jackson acted impulsively or made important decisions during bouts of rage.</p>
			<p>At the same time, it would be a mistake to suggest that Jackson’s middle-of-the-road approach to questions of federal power is an ideological Rosetta Stone capable of explaining all of his actions as president, during either his first or second presidential terms. Jackson, after all, had during his first term allowed the State of Georgia to effectively nullify federal treaties and laws protecting the Cherokees on the grounds that the federal government was powerless to intervene. Conversely, Jackson was not shy about exercising dubious federal powers under the right circumstances, as when he recommended curbing free speech by outlawing the circulation of abolitionist materials in the mail. All of this, however, only goes to show that Jackson’s second inaugural address, like all inaugural addresses, was first and foremost a <em>political</em> document, one that sought to mold public perceptions, and, in doing so, inevitably smoothed away some of the rough edges in Jackson’s record.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
