<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Old Tippecanoe: The Inaugural Address of William Henry Harrison: by Daniel Walker Howe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Old Tippecanoe: The Inaugural Address of William Henry Harrison</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Daniel Walker Howe</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The 3rd of March, 1841, was bitter cold in Washington, <abbr class="postal">DC</abbr> William Henry Harrison, having been chosen Ninth President of the United States in the election of 1840, was now due to take the oath of office and assume its duties. Harrison had been depicted during the campaign as a simple old man, content to read while sipping hard cider in the garden of a log cabin. This image had been created as satire by his Jacksonian Democrat opponents but then preempted by his Whig Party supporters, who found it helped Harrison win over some Jacksonian voters. The incoming President was eager to move away from this humble characterization toward a more presidential one, closer to his own self-image. Accordingly, he had composed a dignified and very elaborate address for his inauguration, only slightly edited by the learned orator Daniel Webster (whom Harrison had already selected to be his Secretary of State).</p>
			<p>Defying the cold, the new incumbent refused to wear an overcoat while delivering his lengthy oration, even though, at 68, he was the oldest president inaugurated before 69-year old Ronald Reagan in 1981. The old man (by the standards of the age) caught the fatal chill that led to pneumonia. As President, he, of course, received the best medical care on offer⁠—which, in an era of medical blood-letting, made his condition worse. Harrison’s address remains the longest one ever delivered at a presidential inauguration⁠—heralding, ironically, the shortest term ever served by an American President. Harrison died exactly one month after delivering this speech.</p>
			<p>Harrison conceived his inaugural address as a repudiation of the strong presidency that the Democratic Party of Andrew Jackson and his designated heir Martin Van Buren had introduced. Presidential power had been the major issue debated in the campaign of 1840. The Whig Party to which Harrison belonged had taken its name from an English political party that resisted the executive power of the King. Still a major party in 1840, the UK Whigs had been responsible for both reapportioning the House of Commons and freeing the slaves in the British Empire. A prominent feature of the new American Whig Party was the hostile portrayal of Andrew Jackson as a would-be monarch, “King Andrew the First.” Sometimes called the “country party” tradition, such resistance to executive power had been a recurring theme in both colonial and English political tradition during and before the American Revolution. This attitude retained sufficient appeal among the American electorate for the Whigs to invoke it successfully in the election of 1840. Meanwhile, in a variety of locations re-writing their state constitutions at the time, the Whigs consistently favored restricting the executive power of the governors.</p>
			<p>The biggest factor in determining the outcome of the election, however, had actually been the Financial Panic of 1839, which the electorate blamed on the incumbent administration, as electorates always do in hard times. Harrison had beaten Van Buren 234 to 60 in the Electoral College. He could look forward to a Congress with comfortable Whig majorities of seven in the Senate and thirty-one in the House. Under the circumstances, one might expect that Harrison would be looking forward to a glorious triumph and exercising relatively unchecked power. In his inaugural address, however, he took an altogether different stance: assuring his audience that he would carefully restrict his own presidential powers, in keeping with his party’s campaign commitment.</p>
			<p>Harrison promised “a summary of the principles which will govern me” as President. All too often, in both ancient and modern times, he noted, office-holders neglect promises made before election once they have secured power. (Classical allusions were consistent with the dignified image the speaker wished to present; Harrison had studied classics at Hampton-Sydney College in Virginia before turning to his military career.) The age cherished public speaking as an art form, and Harrison intended to lay his claim to its prestige. Yet the grammatical structure of his oration, with its long and complex sentences, does not seem very well suited to a large audience out of doors. At first it may have seemed to listeners that the incoming President prioritized Constitutional theory over practical matters, but Harrison soon gave his Constitutional interpretation specific relevance. Declaring that he regretted the Constitution had permitted Presidents to run for re-election, Harrison promised at the outset that he himself would not do so. Everyone in the audience would have immediately interpreted this as a reproach directed at both Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, whose attempted re-election Harrison had just defeated.</p>
			<p>The speaker immediately turned his attention to another power the Constitution had bestowed on the Federal Chief Executive: to veto acts of Congress. At that time, the veto power seemed much more drastic and unusual than it does to us. None of the first six Presidents had ever invoked it! The veto was closely associated with Andrew Jackson’s decision to use it to nullify Congressional renewal of the Charter of the Second Bank of the United States. Harrison took the position that legislative power belonged to the Houses of Congress, and the Executive Branch should not normally interfere with it. In the final analysis, however, he reluctantly conceded that the existence of a veto power was legitimate to help guard against abuse of the Constitution by Congress.</p>
			<p>Harrison next complained about the President’s power to appoint all employees of the federal government. Andrew Jackson had turned this labor force (mostly postal employees in those days) into a huge source of political power by purging employees who were not active members of his party and filling their places with loyal Jacksonian Democrats. No Civil Service then restrained the president’s discretion in appointments. Harrison’s legitimate protest against such abuse of executive power was only gradually implemented during the late decades of the nineteenth century by the creation of the Civil Service. Another of Harrison’s complaints—that Jackson tried to interfere with freedom of the press in order to favor periodicals that supported the Democratic Party—did not identify a specific remedy and did not lead to any particular action.</p>
			<p>Harrison expressed disapproval of Congressional attempts to interfere with the governance of the District of Columbia. He was undoubtedly referring to proposals to abolish slavery in the District, although he never mentioned the word slavery. Such proposals often included financial compensation for slave owners, but even so, they were bitterly resented and opposed by slavery’s advocates throughout the South. Harrison had consistently supported slavery during his long service as a governor in the Northwest Territories, and on this issue, he did not draw a distinction between his position and the well-known proslavery stance of Jackson and his Democratic Party. On the subject of relations with the American Indians, however, Harrison did draw such a distinction. Opposition to Jackson’s and Van Buren’s drastic program of “Indian Removal” had been strong among Whigs. Earlier in 1840, Harrison had published a sympathetic history of the northwestern tribes, and in his inaugural address, he called for “liberality and justice” in dealing with “our aboriginal neighbors.”</p>
			<p>To summarize and conflate his moral precepts, Harrison deplored political partisanship. “The reign of an intolerant spirit of party amongst a free people seldom fails to result in a dangerous accession to the executive power,” he warned. Clearly, Harrison identified political partisanship with Andrew Jackson and his followers, but not with his own Whig followers. “All the influence that I possess,” President Harrison promised, “Shall be exerted to prevent the formation at least of an Executive party in the halls of the legislative body.” How this principle could have been followed in practice the American people never had a chance to witness. Harrison’s sudden and surprising death left the White House in the control of his Vice President, John Tyler. (Vice presidents succeeding to the presidency upon their predecessor’s death do not have an opportunity to deliver an inaugural address.) Tyler disagreed with the congressional Whigs about re-creating a Bank of the United States and vetoed their efforts to charter one. Tyler would have liked to create a party of his own, or to enlist the Democrats behind him, but never succeeded in either project. From our own point of view, Harrison’s election led into what historians have called “the second party system,” a two-party system of Whigs and Democrats, rather than the no-party system to which Harrison himself had aspired.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
