<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Art of Power: The Inaugural Address of Lyndon B. Johnson: by Mark K. Updegrove</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-98" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Art of Power: The Inaugural Address of Lyndon B. Johnson</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Mark K. Updegrove</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>On the evening of November 3, 1964, Lyndon Baines Johnson sat at the Presidential Suite at the Driskill Hotel in Austin, Texas, monitoring the results of the election that would relieve him of the stigma of being an “accidental president.” Nearly a year after assuming the presidency after the assassination of John F. Kennedy, he would find that not only had he won the office in his own right but had done so by yielding the biggest electoral mandate in American history to that point, garnering a whopping 61 percent of the popular vote against his Republican opponent, the senator from Arizona and conservative stalwart, Barry Goldwater. The titanic LBJ, who had spent nearly his entire adult life toward the acquisition and exercise of power, climbing the political ladder in Congress to become the most powerful Senate Majority Leader of the century, then moving on the become Kennedy’s vice president, had not only reached the highest rung, he had done so with a landslide. “Our victory was a mandate for action,” he wrote in his memoir <cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Vantage Point</i></cite>, “and I meant it to be used that way.”</p>
			<p>Johnson had spent his first year in the presidency successfully achieving the legislative goals that Kennedy had failed to realize—a tax cut to stimulate a sluggish economy and the passage of the landmark Civil Rights Act, breaking the back of Jim Crow and its false promise of “separate but equal” segregated facilities. “Rightly or wrongly,” he said, “I felt from the very first day in office that I had to carry on for President Kennedy. I considered myself the caretaker of both his people and policy.” But he had begun the lay the groundwork for his own domestic agenda by picking up one unfinished by another president, one he would emulate more than any other: Franklin D. Roosevelt. “This is Kennedy’s program,” he told aides soon after taking over the Oval Office, “and we’re going to get it through. But if we’re going to compete with Roosevelt’s revolution…it’s got to be bigger than anything that has been envisioned so far.”</p>
			<p>Bigger it was. Johnson had come to Washington during depths of the Great Depression in the mid-1930s as FDR’s New Deal, unprecedented government programs to lift Americans from economic ravage, was in full swing, bringing hope and possibility. He saw his administration as not just competing with the New Deal but completing it. Four months before the election, in a commencement address at the University of Michigan, he had planted the seeds of his own outsize domestic vision, unveiling the Great Society, an ambitious legislative agenda around civil rights, federal aid to education, immigration reform, poverty eradication, environmental preservation, and expanded health care. Now, with the presidency in hand for at least the next four years, he would use his Inauguration early in the New Year to promulgate the Great Society as the hallmark of his term in office.</p>
			<p>January 20, 1965, as Lady Bird Johnson wrote, “dawned bright and beautiful,” with a temperature of 38 degrees and sunshine, blue skies, and scattered clouds over the U.S. Capitol. An estimated 1.2 million crowded into Washington for the 36th President’s Inauguration, besting the record set by Kennedy four years earlier by 200,000, further approbation for the bold but often insecure Johnson. Eschewing the top hat, cutaway coat, and striped trousers worn by his Twentieth Century predecessors, Johnson opted for decidedly less formal garb, donning an Oxford gray business suit. Marking an Inauguration Day first, Mrs. Johnson held the Bible on which her husband rested his left hand as he took the oath of office, establishing a tradition upheld by future First Ladies. After reciting the oath that thirty-four men had taken before him, Johnson stood behind the lectern and, for 23 minutes, sounded the overture of his administration.</p>
			<p>In a slow, deliberate voice, he laid out a covenant for the American people comprised of “justice, liberty, and union” that allowed us to become a nation “prosperous, great, and mighty.”</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>Let us now join reason to faith and action to experience, to transform our unity of interest into a unity of purpose. For the Hour and the day and the time are here to achieve progress without strife; to achieve change without hatred; not without difference of opinion but without the deep and abiding divisions which scar the union for generations.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>He made it clear that his vision of justice included all Americans. Portending his commitment to civil rights well beyond signing the Civil Rights into law the previous year, he declared, “Justice requires us to remember, when any citizen denies his fellow, saying: ‘His color is not mine or his beliefs are strange and different,’ in that moment he betrays America.” Underscoring the need for racial justice, as many as two hundred Blacks in Selma, Alabama, were being arrested after attempting to register to vote as the President spoke to the nation.</p>
			<p>In perhaps the speech’s most memorable lines, Johnson elaborated on his view of the Great Society.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>I do not believe that the Great Society is the ordered, changeless, and sterile battalion of ants. It is the excitement of becoming—always becoming, trying, proving, falling, resting and trying again—but always trying and always gaining.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>While not on par with the Century’s most iconic Inauguration Day oratory, it reflected Johnson’s prodigious commitment to deliver social change. It was also in keeping with the view of domestic policy as a fluid, experimental exercise held by Roosevelt, who said, “It is common sense to take a method and try it. If it fails, admit it freely and try another. But above all else, try something.”</p>
			<p>Echoing a chorus of positive reviews for the speech, the New York Times’ James “Scottie” Reston, the dean of White House correspondents, wrote, “President Johnson’s Inauguration was a dramatization of the American Dream. It was ‘bigger and better’ than ever before…In the poignant moment of commitment, he went back to the eternal things: justice, liberty, and unity.” The newly reinstated President danced the night away at a series of five Inaugural balls. As he left the last of them, a gathering at the Sheraton-Hilton where he danced only with women from Texas, he beseeched his fellow revelers, “Don’t say up too late. We’re on our way to the Great Society.”</p>
			<p>In the days ahead, he would work tirelessly to make good on his promise. The Great Society was foremost on LBJ’s mind as he began his new term in office, setting his sights on a flurry of laws that would indeed rival those FDR championed around his New Deal. Johnson had a good head start. In addition to decisively delivering him the presidency, the election tide of 1964 had also brought more Democrats than had been in Congress since the days of the New Deal, with many newly elected lawmakers riding into office on Johnson’s back. Still, Johnson took nothing for granted. Acutely aware of the ephemeral nature of political capital—“When a man is first elected President, he’s a giraffe; six months later he’s a worm,” he said—he spent much of it the same year, while standing at the peak of his presidency. In 1965 alone, he set in motion a domestic agenda that included the signing of the Voting Rights Act, the Immigration Act, Elementary and Secondary Education Act, the Higher Education Act, the Highway Beautification Act, and the Clean Air Act; the creation of Medicare, Medicaid, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for Humanities; and the implementation of Head Start. In many ways, the advance would create the foundation for modern America.</p>
			<p>Conspicuously absent from LBJ’s Inauguration speech was any reference to the War in Vietnam, which, along with his formidable accomplishments, would define his presidency. Nor was there any allusion to the cold war or the threat of the spread of communism, which had been the centerpiece of Kennedy’s celebrated rhetoric four years earlier. Unlike JFK, it was domestic policy that fired LBJ’s imagination, not foreign policy. Vietnam, which had landed on his desk the day he inherited the presidency from Kennedy, was an unwanted intrusion, threatening to encroach on the Great Society. And while unity was central to Johnson’s Inauguration Day message, it was his escalation of Vietnam War that would divide the country, creating fissures that would mark the tumultuous latter days of the decade and contributing to LBJ’s decision not to seek reelection in 1968 so that he could concentrate on an honorable peace that would ultimately elude him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
