<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Imperial Presidency: The Second Inaugural Address of William McKinley: by Christopher McKnight Nichols</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-66" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Imperial Presidency: The Second Inaugural Address of William McKinley</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Christopher McKnight Nichols</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>In the campaign leading up to his first term, William McKinley often spoke of his hope to focus on pressing domestic issues such as the economic recession that began with the Panic of 1893, the politics and economics of the gold standard and bimetallism, as well as protective tariffs. However, that was not to be. Currency, the economy, and tariffs were significant factors in his first term but McKinley was mostly consumed with foreign relations—including the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>’s first war with a European nation in over eighty-years.</p>
			<p>A popular rebellion in Cuba, one of many over the past generation, heightened tensions with Spain exploded when the <i>USS Maine</i> did, sinking in Havana Harbor in February 1898; this helped to precipitate war in April of that year, not just in the Caribbean but also in the Pacific. In the aftermath, the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> annexed Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and Guam, and also acquired the Philippines and protection over Cuba. One result of such actions is that the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> became embroiled in a deadly counter-insurgency war in the Philippines against the very same revolutionaries the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> had come to fight with against Spain. The struggle continued through the election of 1900, until the second war in the Philippines formally ended in 1902, although resistance by Filipinos continued. Thus, the politics of the presidential election in 1900 and for a second term revolved largely around foreign policy concerns.</p>
			<p>McKinley’s resounding “rematch” victory came over William Jennings Bryan, a “fusion” candidate of the Democratic and Populist Parties, who ran with Vice Presidential nominee Adlai Stevenson. McKinley was on the ticket with war hero “rough rider” New York Governor Theodore Roosevelt because Vice President Garret Hobart died in November 1899, making him the sixth VP to die in office. McKinley garnered nearly a million more votes than Bryan, carrying twenty-eight states and 292 electoral college votes to Bryan’s 17, most of which were in the “solid” Democratic South. It was the rapid victory in what came to be known as the “Spanish American War” combined with an economic recovery that propelled McKinley and the Republicans to a sweeping victory. After wins in the Senate and some losses in the House during the midterm elections of 1898, after 1900 Republicans now held the “trifecta” of power—controlling the White House, the Senate, and the House of Representatives. In short, election to a second term at a moment like this amounted to a mandate. McKinley’s second inaugural therefore focused largely on foreign policy successes and areas remaining to be resolved, while also touching on the major economic and revenue progress made in his first term. He also hinted at changes to tariff and tax policies that he hoped to achieve, as well as international relations goals, all of which would go unfulfilled as he was assassinated in September 1901.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>In just the second ever filmed presidential inaugural address, <a href="https://www.loc.gov/item/00694335/">William McKinley paraded to the Capitol on Monday, March 4, 1901</a>. It was an overcast day with clouds and rain overnight. It was dry during the procession to the Capitol and temperatures reached a relatively balmy mid-to-upper 40s by noon. Light rain returned throughout the ceremony that day, but McKinley and those in the audience continued undeterred. With the economy heating up and a successful war against a European nation, the future seemed bright for the president, the Republican Party, and the nation.</p>
			<p>“When we assembled here on the 4th of March, 1897,” began McKinley <a href="https://www.loc.gov/resource/cph.3a23811/">from a stage in front of the capital</a> festooned with flags and surrounded by an enormous crowd, “there was great anxiety with regard to our currency and credit. None exists today,” he proudly declared.</p>
			<p>As with most inaugural addresses, McKinley outlined the current state of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S</abbr>. He noted with satisfaction the many success of his first term. In particular, he mentioned settling issues related to currency (by staying on the gold standard), securing more tax revenue, increasing production, and reaching markets and home and abroad. The essence of that message was epitomized by his statement that the “national verdict of 1896 has for the most part been executed.”</p>
			<p>So, what next? McKinley noted that in his new term he would adhere to what had worked well in the past one, namely “sound business methods and strict economy in national administration and legislation” without becoming “reckless.” In other words, the people could count on McKinley and the Republicans to continue delivering business-oriented policies to seek more prosperity, limit appropriations, and avoid “waste and extravagance.” He pushed for more reciprocal treaties with other nations to keep promoting prosperity.</p>
			<p>Another element of his speech was emblematic of the times and of tensions in the Republican Party. What had been the so-called “party of Lincoln” was beginning to fracture regarding how to grapple with rising Jim Crow segregation, atrocities against Black people, and the role of Democrats in building up systematic disfranchisement in the American South. Yet, in the seventh paragraph, in the middle of the speech, McKinley paused to reflect on the major challenges of the nineteenth century and to declare them overcome: “sectionalism,” he asserted, “has disappeared.” His campaign and the 1900 electoral college map undermines such a claim. Nevertheless, McKinley laid out a case for unity, in essence agreeing to the end of Reconstruction and not making any strong claim for racial justice at the federal level. He avoided explicit discussion of the injustices, such as rampant lynching and acts of violence, that were purging Southern voting rolls of African Americans, themselves stalwart Republican voters. “Division on public questions,” he said, “can no longer be traced by the war maps of 1861.” As in the campaign of 1900, McKinley argued for sectional harmony; he connected prosperity and national greatness to expansion abroad. In the inaugural, he implicitly linked the challenges of ensuring equal protection after the end of slavery given entrenched racism to the advance of American democracy abroad. McKinley tried to ameliorate the numerous concerns of fellow citizens and Republicans by arguing that “our institutions will not deteriorate by extension, and our sense of justice will not abate under tropic suns in distant seas.” But such claims rang hollow to persecuted Black Americans rapidly losing hard-fought citizenship rights as well as to those now subject to <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> rule in the Caribbean and Pacific.</p>
			<p>In keeping with that emphasis on “extension,” much of his speech focused on the foreign policies that helped to cement McKinley’s reputation. Noting that the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> “stood on the brink of war” four years earlier, he first made clear that he did his best to avoid war but when conflict became “inevitable,” a bipartisan Congress brought the nation to war reluctantly. The result, he triumphantly declared, was an honorable course of action and victory. He boldly clarified that the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> had no interest in ruling Cuba and he assured domestic and international audiences that the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> would be a benign protector of the Cuban people (unlike the Spanish). While some in his party and across the nation hoped the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> might eventually annex Cuba, and others were adamantly opposed to remaining there, even as protectors, in the speech, McKinley laid out his vision of <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> objectives: to help get the Cuban people “with all practicable speed” through the stages to establish “a free and independent government.”</p>
			<p>McKinley also hinted at a national first at the intersection of commerce, diplomacy, and military policy when he mentions “thrilling scenes in China.” The <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> had issued what we now know as the “Open Door Notes” in 1899 and 1900, making a worldwide claim that American goods and businesses would not be prevented access to markets in China. To buttress the Open Door pronouncement, in a historic first, McKinley had deployed <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> marines and naval forces to fight, for the first time alongside European militaries, in China, to rescue their citizens and agents and defend the foreign legation district in Beijing during the Boxer Rebellion (1899-1901).</p>
			<p>McKinley concluded the speech by addressing an area of uncertainty. He was expressing his hopes for a peaceful resolution to the ongoing insurgency in the Philippines and articulated a vision much at odds with events on the ground at home and abroad. A robust group known as the Anti-Imperialist League had formed in June 1898 to oppose <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> expansionism. They particularly rejected the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> annexation and rule of the Philippines. Their ranks were remarkably heterogeneous, making it the most diverse large foreign policy lobby in <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> history and included such figures as Mark Twain, Andrew Carnegie, William James, Grover Cleveland, Jane Addams, Samuel Gompers, and W.E.B. Du Bois, among others. In the campaign of 1900 and at the time of the inaugural address, they pushed back against <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> occupation policies in the Philippines as an anti-democratic, imperialist project unbecoming of a republican nation born in revolutionary struggle to achieve self-rule. They asked: “is the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> a republic or an empire?” William Jennings Bryan echoed aspects of their critique of McKinley’s expansionist policies of ruling peoples “against their will,” but the war was popular, patriotism and nationalism were potent, and the charges did not stick. Still, the facts were difficult to contest. In 1899 <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> troops had turned on the Filipino revolutionaries and the first democratic government that they had formed. In McKinley’s inaugural address, however, he dismissed this criticism. The <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> was “not waging war against the inhabitants of the Philippines Island … [rather] a portion of them are making war against the United States.” He concluded his inaugural address by laying out key American aims in the Philippines: pledging to support and protect the Islands and its peoples, which acquired through the Treaty of Paris with Spain (ratified 1899), to end the bloodshed, to guarantee “order” as well as “security for life, property, liberty, freedom of conscience, and the pursuit of happiness.”</p>
			<p>A “civilizing” mission was the central cog in the ideological machine of <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> expansionism, as McKinley and fellow Republican advocates of a “large policy” of <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> expansionism, such as Massachusetts Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, Roosevelt, and future president William Howard Taft saw it. Taft, hand-picked by McKinley, was then serving as head of the First Philippine Commission (running the government there), soon to be <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> Civil Governor of the Philippines, advocated a project of tutoring those in the Philippines (as well as Cuba and Puerto Rico) through stages to ascend to the ability to build up and maintain what McKinley called in the speech a “government of liberty.” Taft, at McKinley’s instruction, aimed to create new civil society institutions, representative government, and public education in the Philippines similar to American models.</p>
			<p>Many Filipinos, including much of the leadership of the revolutionary armies that had been seeking freedom against Spain, did not see shifting to the protection of the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> as a tolerable culmination of their efforts; they continued to fight against those they perceived as a new occupation army, through a series of losses that resulted in a peace treaty in July 1902. In the course of this conflict, both sides committed heinous acts, and the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> adopted widely despised techniques of interrogation, such as water-boarding and population control, grouping people into camps, as the Spanish had. Ultimately the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> lost far more in the war in the Philippines than in Spain (nearly 5,000 <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> troops, with Philippine casualties and famine killing as many as 200,000, by some estimates). Sporadic hostilities against the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> continued for over a decade. The islands did not achieve independent self-rule until 1946.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>McKinley’s speech was hailed as a success. One headline read “<a href="https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn85066387/1901-03-05/ed-1/seq-1/">Chief Champion of Prosperity Inaugurated for a Second Term</a>.” The presence of foreign diplomats newly recognizing the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>’s international power in the wake of war with Spain was widely noted in contemporary accounts, as were the cheers that McKinley received from the crowds that had gathered despite the rain and overcast day.</p>
			<p>Though McKinley did not have the great charisma of his VP and successor, Theodore Roosevelt, he was affable and well aware of the importance of his speeches and messages. In his first term, with help from Ohio Republican Senator and arch-strategist Mark Hanna, and especially several exceptional aides, McKinley built up the White House’s first-ever real press operations team. As several scholars have observed, he was essential in the “modernization of presidential press relations.” He held press conferences, offered scoops to favored journalists, provided office space in the White House of correspondents, established routines for monitoring the press and releasing statements, including enforcement against media and journalists who published information before it was agreed they do so. Notably, McKinley built a “war room,” as commander-in-chief to manage the conflicts in the Caribbean and Pacific in near-real time via telegram and telephone, heralding a new era and the dawn of the “imperial presidency,” setting the stage for the Roosevelt presidency’s masterful efforts at public relations.</p>
			<p>Where was McKinley headed? From his speech, it seems clear that balancing streamlining federal government operations, promoting business while keeping an eye on individual opportunities, enhancing domestic production, and advancing foreign market access were key areas McKinley hoped to take the nation over the next four years.</p>
			<p>It is impossible to know what might have happened if McKinley had not been assassinated on September 14, 1901, at the Buffalo, NY Pan-American Exposition by anarchist Leon Czołgosz. Shot twice in the abdomen on September 6, McKinley had a modest recovery and then lingered as gangrene set in, dying in the early morning on September 14. He was the third president to be assassinated, all in under forty years (including Abraham Lincoln in 1865 and James Garfield in 1881). His killing by a self-professed, unrepentant anarchist, in an era of labor unrest, hyper-nationalism, and Americanism, following a “splendid little war” (as John Hay famously put it), shook the nation. In turn, the McKinley assassination helped to consolidate federal power and propelled anti-radical thought and police action.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless, McKinley’s inaugural speech provides some clues as to the aims he might have pursued. In that address and subsequent speeches before his death, he hinted at the desire to push for reductions in tariffs and to advocate for more reciprocal and bilateral trade deals. He had the credibility and support to have accomplished that given his success in championing the major tariff increase (some as high as 49 percent) in 1890 that bore his name, “the McKinley Tariff.” Roosevelt was uninterested in promulgating major tariff changes. Nevertheless, some historians suggest that much of what happened under Roosevelt would have happened under McKinley, such as the Panama Canal, moderate lawsuits and trust-busting efforts, and the settlement of boundary issues with Canada.</p>
			<p>On the other hand, Theodore Roosevelt’s policies of pushing for conservation and national parks, his “square deal” approach to the federal government as central mediator in business-labor disputes, <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> mediation in the Russo-Japanese War, and perhaps some of his later progressive reform tendencies were less likely under McKinley. Roosevelt welcomed Booker T. Washington to the White House in October 1901, a gesture in keeping with Lincoln’s invitation to Frederick Douglass in 1863. This caused great consternation from Southern whites, but Roosevelt held his ground. One cannot imagine McKinley doing so.</p>
			<p>After McKinley died, Roosevelt, in his first address to Congress, vowed that government must do more clean up industrial America; to protect individuals, workers, women, and children; to limit working hours, and to prevent the exploitation of natural resources. He also pushed to keep out immigrants who would not be exemplary citizens (by this, he was rejecting radicals like Czołgosz). He also proposed building up the army and navy to help spread <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> ideals worldwide and solidify the nation’s position as a world power. At the very least, had McKinley lived, some of the most radical of these policies would have been put off until a possible Roosevelt presidency, which could not have happened until 1908. That said, fellow Republicans were calmed by the relative lack of radicalism from the immensely popular and head-strong Roosevelt, something that they had feared when he joined the ticket in 1900.</p>
			<p>In turn, had McKinley served two terms and so had Roosevelt, then the ruptures of the Republican Party and the contested four-way election of 1912 likely would not have happened. The election of 1912 drove a wedge between incumbent William Howard Taft and his former mentor and ally Roosevelt, who split off from the Republicans and started his own party, the Bull Moose, which in turn made room for Democrat Woodrow Wilson to pull out a narrow victory, aided also by the remarkable showing of Socialist Eugene Debs. In turn, this suggests another astonishing counterfactual: Roosevelt, not Wilson, might well have been president during World War I. Given Roosevelt’s advocacy of intervention in the war and a League to Enforce Peace, it is entirely possible Roosevelt might have led the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> into the Great War sometime after summer 1914 and before April 1917, when a confluence of factors pushed Wilson to declare war as an “associate power” aiming to “make the world safe for democracy.” How might the war have been different if the <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> had intervened in 1915 or 1916? What might that have meant for the Bolshevik Revolution? The dissolution of the Russian, Ottoman, Austro-Hungarian, German, and other empires? How might a Roosevelt and <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr>-led international organization have been part of the peace-making? The possibilities are endless, and the results unknowable.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
