<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 42</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-42" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The First Inaugural Address of Abraham Lincoln</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> David S. Reynolds</h3>
			<p>Abraham Lincoln delivered his first inaugural address during the worst crisis in American history.  Between November 6, 1860, when Lincoln won the presidency in a four-man race, and March 4, 1861, when he gave the inaugural address, seven Southern states seceded from the Union institution and formed what they called a separate nation, the Confederate States of America, with its own constitution, president, and legislature. The inaugural address, Lincoln knew, must be very cautiously worded. It must affirm the federal government’s resolve to save the Union without pushing the South so hard that reunion became impossible.</p>
			<p>In the inaugural address, Lincoln repeated several points he had made in previous speeches: secession was impossible, because a minority cannot overrule the majority; the North would not invade the South without provocation; his administration would leave slavery alone where it existed and would enforce the Fugitive Slave Act as long as the suspected runaways received due process.</p>
			<p>Lincoln’s answer to Southerners who used states’ rights to defend secession was that there is a “universal law,” or “organic law,” that is “the fundamental law of all national governments.”</p>
			<p>No nation, he pointed out, was formed with its own destruction in mind. Perpetuity was the goal of any nation. “It is safe to assert,” he said, “that no government proper, ever had a provision in its organic law for its own termination.” In America, Lincoln said, national consolidation originated with the Articles of Association (1774), was made perpetual by the Declaration of Independence (1776) and the Articles of Confederation (1781), and then was codified by the Constitution (1787). The Constitution proclaimed that the aim of the people of the United States was “to form a more perfect union.” Secession, which creates a Union that is “less perfect than before” was thus “absurd.”</p>
			<p>While emphasizing the broader law of nations, Lincoln in the inaugural did not lose sight of the moral law that motivated him and other antislavery reformers. He said, “One section [of the nation] believes slavery is right, and ought to be extended, while the other believes it is wrong, and ought not to be extended.”</p>
			<p>To subvert the South’s position, he deployed clever rhetorical weapons. “Physically speaking,” he said, “we cannot separate. We cannot remove our respective sections from each other, nor build an impassable wall between them.” The continent—the very earth itself—bound the parts of the nation together. Separation violated the law of nature.</p>
			<p>He fused religion with democracy: “If the Almighty Ruler of nations, with his eternal truth and justice, be on our side, or on yours, that truth and that justice will surely prevail, by the judgment of this great tribunal, the American people.” The North and the South, he was saying, each believed that its view was supported by God. Which side was correct must be finally decided by the “great tribunal”: the people. In the 1860 election, the people had decided against slavery. In democratic America, the people’s judgment was equivalent to God’s judgment.</p>
			<p>Lincoln named two great dangers to the nation: despotism and anarchy. Despotism would result from an overbearing federal government that ignored the constitutional rights of states or individuals. Anarchy, on the other hand, resulted from secession, or an overemphasis of states’ rights. “Plainly,” Lincoln declared, “the central idea of secession, is the essence of anarchy.” If a group of states separates from the Union, why cannot one or two states, by the same principle, separate from the newly formed confederacy? Other divisions would follow. Centrifugalism would reign.</p>
			<p>A respect for majority rule, Lincoln argued, can hold the sections of the nation together. “Whoever rejects it,” he declared, “does, of necessity, fly to anarchy or despotism.”</p>
			<p>Lincoln had worked on the address for several weeks prior to March 4 and had distributed it among friends for their comments. Two, Orville Browning and William Seward, softened his tone. Browning thought Lincoln’s declared intention to “reclaim” US forts taken over by the rebels made the federal government sound too aggressive. Lincoln removed the word, saying, more mildly, that the federal power would be used “to hold, occupy, and possess the property, and places belonging to the government, and to collect the duties and imposts.”  Seward suggested thirty-three changes, twenty-seven of which Lincoln accepted, some in modified form. By far the most important was Seward’s suggestion to replace the militant closing line of the original, in which Lincoln left the question of “peace, or a sword” up to the South, with a charitable final paragraph that, in Lincoln’s reworking, became one of the most memorable passages in American oratory.</p>
			<p>Here is Seward’s version of the paragraph:</p>
			<p><blockquote>I close. We are not we must not be aliens or enemies but [“countrym” deleted] fellow countrymen and brethren. Although passion has strained our bonds of affection too hardly they must not [“be broken they will not” deleted], I am sure they will not be broken. The mystic chords which proceeding from [“every ba” deleted] so many battle fields and [“patriot” deleted] so many patriot graves [“bind” deleted] pass through all the hearts and [“hearths” deleted] all the hearths in this broad continent of ours will yet [“harmon” deleted] again harmonize in their ancient music when [“touched as they surely” deleted] breathed upon [“again” deleted] by the [“better angel” deleted] guardian angel of the nation.</blockquote></p>
			<p>Here is Lincoln:</p>
			<p><blockquote>I am loth to close. We are not enemies, but friends. We must not be enemies. Though passion may have strained, it must not break our bonds of affection. The mystic chords of memory, stre[t]ching from every battle-field, and patriot grave, to every living heart and hearthstone, all over this broad land, will yet swell the chorus of the Union, when again touched, as surely they will be, by the better angels of our nature.</blockquote></p>
			<p>Besides streamlining Seward’s bumpy language, Lincoln emphatically called for national unity on the basis of common culture.  The “mystic chords” connecting the dead with the living evoked spiritualism, the influential movement that deeply affected Mary Todd Lincoln and millions of other Americans. The connecting “chords” would remind many of Lincoln’s hearers of the electromagnetic forces that were then thought to form “spiritual telegraph” between the living and the dead. The joining of every “patriot grave” to “every living heart and hearthstone” drew from other sources of cultural unity: the shared worship of the founding generation, which negated sectional categories, and the imagery found in popular domestic literature. “This broad land” utilized political ecology in its suggestion of the American continent. “The chorus of union” referenced music, which Lincoln considered a key unifying cultural force. “The better angels of our nature” not only humanized Seward’s rather distant “guardian angel of the nation,” but it also drew from what was a common trope in sentimental literature of that era: the angelic nature of good people.</p>
			<p>Lincoln’s revised version of Seward’s paragraph was a culturally representative passage offered to a divided nation in what was a massive rhetorical effort to repair the Union. The effort failed. Although Northern journalists generally saw the inaugural as a sensible, compassionate peace offering, Southerners took it as coercive declaration by a Black Republican president. Within eight weeks of giving the speech Lincoln was presiding over a war that would last for four years and would cost some 750,000 American lives. His masterly language could not stave off bloody civil war.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
