<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 104</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-104" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Remarks Upon Taking the Oath of Office as President</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> John Robert Greene</h3>
			<p>The Inaugural Address of Gerald R. Ford as the thirty-eighth President of the United States, delivered from the White House East Room at 12:05 PM on Friday, August 9, 1974, was unique in the annals of American History. Ford was the first vice president to accede to the presidency under the terms of the 25th Amendment, following the resignation that morning of Richard M. Nixon. Moreover, while he was the eighth vice president to inherit his office from a sitting president, he was the first to deliver an address to the American people upon the occasion of his taking power.</p>
			<p>Vice-Presidential speechwriter Robert Hartmann, soon to serve as a Counselor to President Ford, remembered that Ford gave him only one day’s notice to craft comments which would follow Ford’s swearing in. In light of the implosion of the Nixon presidency, Hartmann remembered that as he began thinking, he jotted down three key themes&mdash;“Take Charge,” “Legitimacy,” and “Truth is the Glue.”</p>
			<p>Hartmann then worked to set the tone for the speech. A large part of this was deciding what to call it. It would be delivered in the shadow of a presidential resignation, and the air of sheer exhaustion and relief that permeated the nation that August negated the use of any of the pomp and circumstance that would normally accompany a presidential inauguration. Moreover, one of Ford’s immediate goals was to distance himself from his predecessor, a man known for his formal, often stilted speech delivery. With these thoughts in mind, Hartmann settled upon Ford’s opening line&mdash;that what he was about to deliver was “not an Inaugural Speech, not a Fireside Chat⁠ ⁠… Just a little straight talk among friends.”</p>
			<p>The speech continued along a path designed to exorcise the ghost of Nixon Past. Hartmann’s dismissal of Watergate&mdash;My Fellow Americans, our long national nightmare is over”&mdash;was the most quoted passage of the speech, and it became one of the most memorable lines in modern inaugural history. However, when Hartmann had Ford claim that “Our constitution works. Our great republic is a government of laws and not men,” he was on less solid ground. Many Americans, upset that Nixon had yet to be indicted for crimes that included at minimum an obstruction of justice which had been recorded on the White House taping system, were about to deflate Ford’s honeymoon with charges of a deal between he and Nixon&mdash;charges that would only be intensified exactly one month after Ford took office when he pardoned Nixon. Still, the line exuded an optimism that Americans desperately wanted to experience, and few observers challenged this assessment at the time.</p>
			<p>When Ford strode into the White House East Room, holding the hand of his wife Betty and surrounded by White House staffers, cabinet members, and congressional leaders who had just witnessed Nixon’s rather maudlin farewell (indeed, the Fords were the last to say goodbye to Nixon and his wife, Pat as they boarded Marine One on the South Lawn of the White House) he was understandably tense. Immediately following his swearing-in by Chief Justice Warren Burger, Ford began his speech in a tight, stilted delivery. This was unlike Ford, who loved the speechmaking and gladhanding of a political campaign and had a professional politician’s grace and ease in front of both crowd and camera. But as he moved through his address, Ford loosened up. He delivered Hartmann’s “long national nightmare” line with both conviction and forcefulness, as the new president looked square into eyes of his audience and proclaimed the start of his own administration.</p>
			<p>But even this line was not enough for Ford to feel comfortable that he had separated himself from his predecessor: “If you have not chosen me by secret ballot, neither have I gained office by any secret promises. I have not campaigned either for the Presidency or the Vice Presidency. I have not subscribed to any partisan platform. I am indebted to no man, and only to one woman&mdash;my dear wife&mdash;as I begin this very difficult job.” The latter portion of that phrase was a break with tradition, as Ford became the first president to reference his wife in his Inaugural Address, a line that when he delivered it, nearly caused his voice to break. The rest of the talk emphasized Ford’s midwestern roots and his deeply held Episcopalian faith, as when he asked the nation for “your prayers for Richard Nixon and his family. May our former President, who brought peace to millions, find it for himself.” When he was finished, instead of attending parades and Inaugural Balls in his honor, Ford walked down the hall to the Oval Office, and immediately began a series of meetings with those in his new administration.</p>
			<p>It all took less than fifteen minutes. At 850 words it was the fourth shortest Inaugural Address in history (only Washington’s First Inaugural, Lincoln’s Second, and Franklin Roosevelt’s fourth were shorter). It was so brief that many in the press did not know what to make of it&mdash;CBS News, for example, called Ford’s speech “Inaugural Remarks.” But whatever it was called, the speech was a resounding success. Ford’s reassuring presence, equally as much as Hartmann’s words, helped the country start to breathe again. Articulating the feelings of many Americans, when Ford’s speech was over, Warren Burger turned to Senate Minority Leader Hugh Scott and said “Hugh, it worked. Thank God it worked.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
