<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of John Adams</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Rhonda Barlow</h3>
			<p>On the day after his inauguration as the second vice president of the United States, John Adams wrote to his wife Abigail, “Your dearest Friend never had a more trying day than Yesterday.” As the successor to George Washington, he faced a daunting challenge: to the tearyeyed crowd gathered in the chamber of the House of Representatives on March 4, 1797, it appeared that a glorious sun was setting, and one “less Splendid” was rising. Adams nevertheless observed, “Methought I heard him think Ay! I am fairly out and your fairly in! see which of Us will be happiest.”</p>
			<p>For President Adams, the unhappy circumstances of 1797 included not only unfavorable comparisons to George Washington, but also a crisis in foreign policy, which had contributed to a division of the Federalists between those who would follow his leadership, and the High Federalists, who tended to look to Alexander Hamilton for guidance, as well as the emergence of the rival Republican Party. Adams had been Washington’s vice president, Alexander Hamilton the secretary of the treasury, and Thomas Jefferson the secretary of state. Hamilton, though now a private citizen, held tremendous influence with Washington’s⁠&mdash;now Adams’s⁠&mdash;cabinet, and emphasized the advantages to the United States of commercial ties with Great Britain. Jefferson, sympathetic to the French revolutionaries, had abandoned his retirement from public life, and although acknowledged head of the Republican Party, was nevertheless Adams’s vice president. The political chaos seemed to call for the independent executive, balancing opposing forces, whom Adams had written about in the three sprawling volumes of his <cite>Defence of the Constitutions of the United States</cite>.</p>
			<p>The crisis in foreign policy centered on yet another breach in the peace between Great Britain and France. The 1789 French Revolution first appeared to be establishing a constitutional monarchy similar to that of Britain, then a French “sister” republic, even more worthy of the 1778 alliance. But President Washington instead declared the United States at peace with both powers, and sent John Jay to negotiate a commercial treaty with Great Britain. Americans disagreed on their interpretation and application of the 1778 French treaties. Was the United States obligated to take an active part in the war on the side of France? Could French privateers enter American ports with their prizes, and have the local French consul declare them legal captures? Was a treaty made with the French monarch still valid with a revolutionary republican government? Was the Jay Treaty simply a commercial treaty between the United States and Great Britain or was it an unprincipled surrender to the enemy of America’s French ally? Was Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation a violation of the Constitution?</p>
			<p>Two days before Adams’s inauguration, the Directory, whether genuinely appalled that America has signed the Jay Treaty with Great Britain, or simply eyeing American commerce as a source of revenue⁠&mdash;or motivated by some combination of the two⁠&mdash;granted permission to French privateers to seize American merchant ships. Writing to his son, John Quincy on March 31, 1797, Adams explained that his presidency was commencing with a “Misunderstanding” with France that he hoped to resolve through diplomacy without sacrificing American honor. He insisted, using large letters for emphasis, that America was not “Scared.”</p>
			<p>In preparing his inaugural address, Adams needed to acknowledge the status of George Washington, reassure listeners that he took the French threat to American shipping seriously, and attempt to unite the High Federalists and the Jeffersonian Republicans. At over 2000 words, his inaugural address was longer than those given by his predecessor, George Washington, and his successor, Thomas Jefferson. His call for a system of neutrality appears at first glance to be support for George Washington’s Neutrality Proclamation. But Adams’s commitment to an independent foreign policy predated the Washington administration by more than a decade.</p>
			<p>Accordingly, Adams’s speech was an overview of American history that began with the struggle for independence during the American Revolution. By drawing attention to the overreach of the British Parliament, he suggested that the French Directory was attempting a similar tyranny. He praised the Constitution as the foundation for a successful foreign policy, made clear his appreciation for the French, but warned that political factions invited foreign meddling in American politics. By recounting the nation’s history, he highlighted his own role in that history. He was the Atlas of Independence who insisted the time for reconciliation was past, the diplomat in France who refused to be cowed by the Comte de Vergennes, the representative who negotiated the Anglo-American peace treaty that ended the Revolutionary War, and the first minister to the Court of <abbr>St.</abbr> James who heralded a new relationship with the former mother country. The patriotic American familiar with both courts, who had conquered them during the Revolution, was now at the helm. Adams was the revolutionary who insisted, “I will be buried in the Ocean or in any other manner sacrificed, before I will voluntarily put on the Chains of France when I am struggling to throw off those of Great Britain.” There was no danger that as president he would be a pawn of Great Britain, and although not as friendly to France as his vice president Thomas Jefferson, neither was he as hostile as members of his cabinet.</p>
			<p>Adams was unsure if his speech had been successful. Recognizing the opposition he faced, he explained to Abigail on March 9, 1797 that in both his farewell speech to the Senate and his inaugural address, “I was determined to say some Things, as an Appeal to Posterity. foreign nations and future times will understand them better.” But two days later, the Philadelphia <i>Aurora General Advertiser</i>, normally highly critical of the Federalists, conceded that Adams’s inaugural address was that “of a fellow citizen, who will not deign to become the President of a Party, but the President of the United States.” Still in the future were the failed commission to France, the French demand for a bribe which led to the XYZ affair, the new provisional army, the potential escalation of the Quasi-War with France into a full-scale war, the threat of a formal alliance between the United States and Great Britain, and his loss of the presidency.</p>
			<p>Adams would later boast that he was the founder of the American system of neutrality, that he had “humbled” the French Directory, and that in making peace with France he had prevented a tyrannical alliance between the United States and Great Britain. But the memory of his presidency has instead been focused on the notorious Alien and Sedition Acts. The balance between defending the Union from threats foreign and domestic, and at the same respecting individual rights and freedom remains the legacy of his administration.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
