<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Era of Good Feelings: The First Inaugural Address of James Monroe: by Daniel F. Preston</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Era of Good Feelings: The First Inaugural Address of James Monroe</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Daniel F. Preston</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>James Monroe assumed the reins of government during a period of peace and prosperity. The European war that had begun in the early 1790s and that persisted until 1815, and that had ensnared the United States and led to the War of 1812 was at last ended. The American economy, which had been badly shaken by the years of maritime disruption and war, was showing a remarkable recovery, exemplified by the steady stream of revenue from land sales, import tariffs, and excise taxes flowing into the national treasury. To be certain, there were grave crises lurking just beyond the horizon, but in March 1817, a bright future beckoned.</p>
			<p>When Monroe turned to address the crowd attending the ceremony⁠—the first inauguration to be held outdoors⁠—the new president began his remarks by examining the causes of the “present happy condition” of the country. For Monroe, the explanation could be summed up in one word: republicanism. The strength and prosperity of the United States flowed from an adherence to the principles of self-government championed during the American Revolution and enunciated in the federal constitution as well as in the constitutions of the various states. Republicanism⁠—a system of popularly elected representatives and constitutional government free of the trappings of monarchy, hereditary aristocracy, and established religion⁠—was Monroe’s political credo from the days of the American Revolution until his death in 1831.</p>
			<p>How, Monroe asked rhetorically, can we explain the success of the American experiment in elective government in the face of wide-ranging skepticism about the practicability of such a form of government and the failure of other attempts throughout history to establish such a system? During a period “fraught with difficulties” the United States had “flourished beyond example.” The citizens were happy; the nation prosperous; territorial boundaries had been expanded and new states admitted; the states themselves, protected by the national government from foreign aggression, enjoyed sovereignty in their separate spheres and effectively governed themselves. How was this done? “How did we accomplish the revolution?” “How sustain, and pass with glory through the late war?” The president had a ready answer: “The government has been in the hands of the people.” To the people, with their intelligence, their independence, and their virtue “is the credit due.”</p>
			<p>Monroe encapsulated his absolute belief in the political virtue of the American people in just a few sentences. He went into much greater detail, however, in an unused draft of the message. The English heritage of representative government and the semi-independent status of the British American colonies imbued the American people with a love of republicanism. It gave them the fortitude and courage to fight for and win their independence. It gave them the understanding and temperament to form republican governments and the intelligence and virtue to sustain them. As long as the American people remained true to the principles of the Revolution and the Constitution, they could confront and overcome any challenge, domestic or foreign, that arose. “While the constituent body retains its present sound and healthful state,” he said in his address, “every thing will be safe.” There being no crisis of any proportion worth noting, the American people had only two major tasks at hand: to preserve the liberty and advantages they enjoyed under their republican government and to further develop the prosperity of the nation.</p>
			<p>And yet, for all his faith in the American people, he still warned about complacency. Without proper vigilance the people may become “ignorant and corrupt,” “the willing instruments of their own debasement and ruin.” “Usurpation is then an easy attainment,” he warned, “and an usurper soon found.” To prevent such a situation, he vaguely suggested that Congress, “by all wise and constitutional measures,” create a system of academies “as the best means of preserving our liberties,” a hint that he stated more explicitly in his first annual message to Congress in December 1817, by urging a constitutional amendment that would grant “a right in Congress to institute seminaries of learning, for the all-important purpose, of diffusing knowledge among our fellow citizens, throughout the United States.”</p>
			<p>Nor should the American people be complacent about peace. The United States had been caught unprepared for war in 1812, and although the Americans had fought the war to an honorable termination, Monroe knew how perilously close the country had come to disaster. He was now adamant that this must not happen again. The possibility of war in the future should not be discounted and with an enemy determined to “overset our government, to break our union and demolish us as a nation.” The key to national defense was, of course, a well-regulated army and navy, moderate in size, but “adequate to the necessary purposes” of defense. Also, a system of fortifications was needed to defend the nation’s extensive coastline, a measure that Monroe had urged at least as early as 1805. And finally, there was the militia, the central bulwark of defense in any republic. The new president had been an advocate for a strong national defense throughout his public career, but like many of his generation he harbored a fear that a large professional army, detached from the daily concerns of the people, could become an instrument of tyranny. A standing army was certainly necessary to meet any immediate danger, but the great body of any defensive force should be embodied in the militia. Monroe’s experience as governor of Virginia and as Secretary of War made him well aware of the inadequacies of the militia, and he now insisted, as he had done in the past, that this people’s army be “organized and trained as to be prepared for any emergency.”</p>
			<p>Monroe went on to note that the United States was particularly blessed in its geographic location, occupying a portion of the globe that produced a great variety of valuable crops and natural resources. “No country was ever happier with respect to its domain,” he wrote, especially in terms of agriculture. The United States possessed soil so fertile that there had always been a surplus for export, even at the times of the poorest harvests. This benefited not only the growers, but also the merchants and seamen who carried the agricultural bounty to other countries. The United States was home to a vast overseas carrying trade, a trade so critical that British interference with it led to the declaration of war in 1812. Monroe was well aware of the importance of foreign trade to the economic wealth of the nation, and both as Secretary of State and President sought commercial treaties that not only secured advantageous trade agreements with the European powers but also expanded American trade into new markets. At the same time, he hoped to expand the American economy at home, not only by bringing new land into cultivation but also by encouraging the development of manufacturing. The United States possessed the necessary raw materials and capital and “ought not to depend in the degree we have done” on foreign countries for finished goods. This beneficial economic independence could be achieved with “the systematic and fostering care of the government.”</p>
			<p>Monroe ventured on to more controversial ground when he urged the passage of a constitutional amendment granting the national government authority to construct a network of roads and canals. Most Americans acknowledged that such a system was needed, and being national in scope, that it ought to be undertaken by the national government. But they disagreed whether the government possessed the constitutional authority to do so. Monroe was one of the doubters and favored the expedient of a constitutional amendment specifically granting the power. But he had no doubt of the necessity or benefit of such a network. Not only would it add to the “convenience and comfort” of the people, but by shortening distances and making the various parts of the country “more accessible to and dependent on the other,” it would “bind the union more closely together.”</p>
			<p>This brought the president to the other basics tenets of his political creed⁠—the absolute necessity of the union of the states. Monroe believed that the state governments bore the responsibility of protecting the liberty and promoting the welfare of their citizens. But he also believed that they were not strong enough individually and or regionally to do this. They must unite in a continental union to protect the republic from all threats domestic and foreign. Monroe told his audience that he was gratified by the harmony that pervaded the nation. “Discord does not belong to our system.” Unity had carried the American people through past trials, and it would continue to promote prosperity and happiness. The American people “constitute one great family, with a common interest.” “To promote this harmony, in accord with the principles of our republican government, and in a manner to give them the most complete effect, and to advance in all other respects, the best interests of our Union,” Monroe promised, “will be the object of my constant and zealous exertions.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
