<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Grover the Good: The Second Inaugural Address of Grover Cleveland, by Matthew Algeo</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-62" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Grover the Good<br/>
				The Second Inaugural Address of Grover Cleveland</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Matthew Algeo</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>When I think of Grover Cleveland’s second inaugural address on March 4, 1893⁠—which, to be honest, isn’t very often⁠—I imagine myself standing in the crowd on the east side of the Capitol, shivering in the cold, snow swirling. Looking up at burly Cleveland bundled in his big black overcoat, standing at the front of the wooden stage erected at the bottom of the steps, the dome rising up above him in the gloomy gray sky, I strain to hear his oration. Cleveland was one of the most famous public speakers of his age, with a booming voice befitting his large size. He once gave a speech to twenty thousand people at the old Madison Square Garden and it was said that every single one of them could hear every single word.</p>
			<p>But even a bellowing Grover Cleveland cannot overcome Mother Nature on this winter day, and, without the benefit of artificial amplification, his second inaugural address is swallowed up by the howling wind, audible only by those seated closest to him on the stage. Out among the throng huddled on the frozen lawn, Cleveland cannot be heard.</p>
			<p>Which is too bad, because, as long-winded Gilded Age inaugural addresses go, Cleveland’s second wasn’t too bad.</p>
			<p>A little background: Cleveland, of course, was the first and so far only president to win back the office after losing it. So March 4, 1893 really should have been a triumphant day for him—What a comeback!—but, alas, it was not an auspicious time to assume the presidency. Cleveland inherited a mess from Benjamin Harrison. The country was on the brink of an economic catastrophe that would come to be known as the Panic of 1893, the worst depression in the nation’s history until the Great Depression. The Reading Railroad had just gone bankrupt, the stock market was crashing, and unemployment and hunger were rising. So, in his second inaugural, Cleveland attempts to calm fears. He delicately refers to the crumbling economy as “our present embarrassing situation,” and promises to do everything in his power to “avert financial disaster.” He reassures the public that “prudent and effective remedial legislation” will address the crisis.</p>
			<p>At the same time, however, Cleveland warns the people that they should expect little in the way of direct support from the federal government, saying: “The lessons of paternalism ought to be unlearned and the better lesson taught that while the people should patriotically and cheerfully support their Government its functions do not include the support of the people.” This was one of Grover Cleveland’s mantras. There would be no Government handouts. Americans would have to fend for themselves.</p>
			<p>Several other themes emerge in the address, some of which sound archaic to us today: a disdain for tariffs, a commitment to “sound money,” opposition to “wild and reckless” pensions for Civil War veterans. But a few themes still resonate. Cleveland was a Democrat—the only Democrat elected between Buchanan and Wilson, in fact—and the Democrats, in the South at least, were the party of white supremacy. But Cleveland—who was from Buffalo—pointedly includes in the address a call for civil rights for African Americans.</p>
			<p>“Loyalty to the principles upon which our Government rests positively demands that the equality before the law which it guarantees to every citizen should be justly and in good faith conceded in all parts of the land,” he says. “The enjoyment of this right follows the badge of citizenship wherever found, and, unimpaired by race or color, it appeals for recognition to American manliness and fairness.”</p>
			<p>Cleveland also calls for the fair treatment of Native Americans, though in tones that sound a lot like the “paternalism” he earlier disdained. “Every effort should be made to lead them, through the paths of civilization and education, to self-supporting and independent citizenship,” he says. “In the meantime, as the nation’s wards, they should be promptly defended against the cupidity of designing men and shielded from every influence or temptation that retards their advancement.”</p>
			<p>Cleveland was conservative—as that term was understood at the time—but he clearly did not believe in frugality when it came to words. A lawyer by training and profession, Cleveland wrote in a style that might charitably be described as cumbersome. Hence this paragraph, in which Cleveland uses seventy-six words to say, in effect: I have a lot of work ahead if me, but I’ll have plenty of help:</p>
			<p>
				<blockquote>“Fully impressed with the gravity of the duties that confront me and mindful of my weakness, I should be appalled if it were my lot to bear unaided the responsibilities which await me. I am, however, saved from discouragement when I remember that I shall have the support and the counsel and cooperation of wise and patriotic men who will stand at my side in Cabinet places or will represent the people in their legislative halls.”</blockquote>
			</p>
			<p>There’s something else in the speech that, in retrospect, is especially striking. At one point, Cleveland likens the looming financial crisis to an unseen malady:</p>
			<p>
				<blockquote>“The strong man who in the confidence of sturdy health courts the sternest activities of life and rejoices in the hardihood of constant labor may still have lurking near his vitals the unheeded disease that dooms him to sudden collapse.”</blockquote>
			</p>
			<p>Just weeks later, Cleveland himself would discover lurking near his vitals a disease that threatened him to sudden collapse: a cancerous growth on the roof of his mouth. The tumor would be removed in a secret operation on a friend’s yacht in early July.</p>
			<p>Cleveland’s father was a Presbyterian minister, and Cleveland inherited his faith (if not his sobriety). He ends his second inaugural with a call for God’s blessing:</p>
			<p>
				<blockquote>“Above all, I know there is a Supreme Being who rules the affairs of men and whose goodness and mercy have always followed the American people, and I know He will not turn from us now if we humbly and reverently seek His powerful aid.”</blockquote>
			</p>
			<p>Much of Cleveland’s second term would be consumed by political disputes, sectional rivalries, and labor strife. His refusal to initiate bold government programs to counteract the effects of the depression did nothing to endear him to a public weary of the misery. He did not run for a third term in 1896. By then he was so unpopular that even his own party had repudiated him. At the Democratic convention in Chicago that year, delegates hurled more insults at Cleveland than at the Republican presidential nominee, William McKinley.</p>
			<p>Grover Cleveland never wavered from his principles, and he paid the price.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
