<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Comeback Kid: The First Inaugural Address of Bill Clinton, by Steven M. Gillon</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-114" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Comeback Kid<br/>
				The First Inaugural Address of Bill Clinton</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Steven M. Gillon</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>As he stood before the flag-draped façade of the Capitol, with a sea of people stretching to the Washington Monument, Arkansas governor William Jefferson Clinton witnessed a deeply divided and demoralized nation. His party had been out of power for 12 years, during which a revitalized conservative movement led by Ronald Reagan scaled back cherished Democratic social programs. While Reagan’s successor, George <abbr class="name">H. W.</abbr> Bush, had skillfully led the nation’s response to the end of the Cold War, he had neglected problems on the home front. After seven booming years, the economy sputtered. The GNP increased at an anemic 2.2 percent, a reflection of rising unemployment, falling housing starts, and low consumer confidence.</p>
			<p>Despite Bush’s economic failures, the Democratic Party in 1993 was still trying to recover from old political wounds. During the 1960s, the once powerful New Deal coalition had shattered in the face of hot button social issues involving race, crime, and taxes. These deep divisions reached a boiling point in 1992 after the acquittal of four white police officers accused of savagely beating an African American motorist, Rodney King. Shortly after the verdicts were announced, African Americans in South Central Los Angeles erupted into the deadliest urban riot in over a century. By the time the violence ended three days later, 58 people lay dead, over 800 buildings were destroyed, and thousands more were damaged or looted. During his campaign, Clinton had attributed the riots to “12 years of denial and neglect” of festering racial issues under Reagan and Bush. But an opposing explanation—first touted by Nixon in the late 1960s—argued that such unrest revealed the necessity for “law and order.” Once elected, Clinton would also embrace this alternate narrative, striking a balance between activist social policy and more punitive measures.</p>
			<p>By straddling political divides in this way, the Clinton presidency seemed for many observers to promise a turning point, a shift away from the stale partisan debates that had divided the nation since the 1960<abbr>s.</abbr> After all, Clinton had won the presidency by blending liberal and conservative positions. He had campaigned for office as a “New Democrat,” someone who understood the economic concerns of the struggling middle class, while also adopting traditionally conservative positions on crime and welfare. In the weeks before the address, Clinton made clear to speechwriters that he wanted to use this moment to emphasize the concept of an “American renewal” which fused elements of both tradition and innovation.</p>
			<p>His inaugural address, just 14 minutes long, was the third shortest in televised history, but it did not lack substance. After thanking his predecessor and others of his generation for their service and sacrifice, Clinton proclaimed that a new generation had come to power—“a generation raised in the shadow of the Cold War.” He challenged this subset of “young Americans” to embark on what he called “a season of service” and pledged that his administration, as the standard-bearer for this generation, would do its part to revitalize the country.</p>
			<p>It was not difficult for Clinton to make the case that his election represented a thorough changing of the guard. Only 46 years old, Clinton was the third youngest president in history, after John F. Kennedy and Theodore Roosevelt. As America’s first “baby boomer” president, Clinton possessed no memory of World War <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. Instead, his political views were shaped by the tumultuous events of the 1960s—the civil rights movement, antiwar protests, and a youth-led rebellion against authority. With an identity born from this revolutionary era, Clinton appeared to intimately understand the nature of radical change.</p>
			<p>But Clinton’s novelty did not mean an ignorance of the past, and his speechwriters made sure to sprinkle his address with subtle references to previous presidents. In addition to invoking George Washington and Thomas Jefferson, Clinton paid homage to Abraham Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address by calling for a celebration of “the mystery of American renewal.” The inauguration, he continued, was “held in the depth of winter, but by the words we speak and the faces we show the world, we force the spring.” This season signaled a renaissance, when “the world’s oldest democracy” would manifest “the vision and courage to reinvent” itself. Hinting at what would guide this reinvention, Clinton invoked Franklin Roosevelt’s call during the Great Depression for “bold, persistent experimentation.” Most significantly, America’s rebirth would embrace the spirit of John F. Kennedy, someone Clinton had idolized since the age of 16. Echoing JFK’s inaugural address, Clinton emphasized the necessity of sacrifice and service. “My fellow Americans,” he stated in his casual, conversational tone, “you, too, must play your part in our renewal.” In summoning these themes—rebirth, experimentation, sacrifice—Clinton positioned himself within a specific political genealogy, one that stood for liberalism’s deepest values.</p>
			<p>Yet, his words were also tinged with more conservative overtones regarding responsibility and limited government. In an obvious reference to his campaign promise to “end welfare as we know it,” Clinton asserted that the time had come to “break the bad habit of expecting something for nothing, from our Government or from each other.” He then offset this statement with an appeal for togetherness: “Let us all take more responsibility, not only for ourselves and our families but for our communities and our country.” By yoking individual responsibility to social awareness, Clinton was starting to present the contours of a new kind of centrism.</p>
			<p>Clarifying this centrism also meant criticizing the Bush presidency, an approach that Clinton had honed during his campaign for president. People, he declared, were “working harder for less” while health care costs devastated families and “the fear of crime” sowed distrust among many Americans. “We know we have to face hard truths and take strong steps, but we have not done so” he said in an obvious jab at his predecessor. “Instead, we have drifted, and that drifting has eroded our resources, fractured our economy and shaken our confidence.” The Bush administration, Clinton implied, had left the nation lost and unmoored without a robust social safety net.</p>
			<p>Significantly, though, Clinton’s approach to these problems blended aspects previously seen as incompatible. His campaign booklet “Putting People First” had outlined how his administration planned to expand social programs that had been starved during the previous 12 years. Indeed, before the election, he rarely even mentioned the deficit. But by the time of his inauguration, Clinton switched gears and decided to make deficit reduction, not new spending, his top priority. “To renew America we must be bold,” he said. “We must do what no generation has had to do before. We must invest more in our own people—in their jobs and in their future—and at the same time cut our massive debt.” That seeming contradiction—practicing financial discipline while also investing in the future—would prove to be one of the greatest challenges faced by the Clinton administration.</p>
			<p>But embracing those challenges, Clinton claimed, was necessary to adapt to the new world order. For the previous half-century, the threat of Soviet aggression abroad and communist subversion at home had forged a fragile consensus in favor of an interventionist foreign policy. Now, with the Cold War over, Clinton stressed how advances in technology and global trade bound the world together, presenting both unprecedented opportunities and challenges. This globalized “New World” was “more free but less stable,” because “profound and powerful forces” exerted constant, unpredictable change. Thus, America’s most urgent task would be to discover how to “make change our friend and not our enemy.” And one way to do that, he suggested, was to adopt new frameworks for thinking about and doing politics.</p>
			<p>However, the high-minded tone of this speech disguised a troubling political reality. Clinton fully realized that he had secured only 43 percent of the popular vote. To assemble a governing coalition, he needed to win over the 19 percent of the electorate who had cast a ballot for eccentric Texas billionaire Ross Perot, whose campaign had focused on deriding the corruption and waste in Washington. In a direct appeal to these voters, Clinton acknowledged that while the capital “is often a place of intrigue and calculation,” under his administration, politics would be reformed so that “power and privilege no longer shout down the voice of the people.”</p>
			<p>After this mildly populist promise, the new president concluded with a rhetorical flourish, invoking God’s help in achieving his agenda. “From this joyful mountaintop of celebration, we hear a call to service in the valley,” Clinton concluded. “We have heard the trumpets. We have changed the guard. And now, each in our own way and with God’s help, we must answer the call.”</p>
			<p>But no appeal to the Almighty could erase an indisputable fact: not everyone embraced Clinton’s call for change. Soon enough, the intensity of that opposition would become boldly apparent, as controversy and scandal engulfed his administration.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
