<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Unprecedented: The Fourth Inaugural Address of Franklin D. Roosevelt: by David B. Woolner</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-88" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Unprecedented: The Fourth Inaugural Address of Franklin D. Roosevelt</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> David B. Woolner</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>At approximately 11:50 a.m. on Saturday January 20, 1945, US President Franklin D. Roosevelt took the arm of his son James, and with his steel braces locked in place, made his way carefully through a small crowd that had gathered on the South Portico of the White House to a chair that had been placed there for him as the inaugural ceremony that would see FDR take the oath of office for the fourth and final time got underway. With the nation at war, FDR had insisted that his unprecedented fourth swearing-in should be a brief, straightforward affair. There would be no inauguration day parade and no elaborate event on the steps of the capitol. He also planned to keep his inaugural remarks short and to the point. Like the rest of the nation, FDR was tired. Tired of the war, tired of the great sacrifices the war demanded, and—as he only admitted to his most intimate confidants—tired of being president.</p>
			<p>Given the situation that the United States and its Allies faced at the beginning of 1945, FDR had good reason to feel fatigued. It had taken many weeks of hard fighting for the Western Allies to recover from the massive counter-offensive that Hitler launched in the Ardennes on December 16, 1944. And even though the Allies had managed to halt the German advance, it was now clear that in spite of the stunning success of the Allied drive across France in the wake of the Normandy invasion, the war was by no means over. Indeed, US battle casualties for the month of December alone were the highest of the war. Worst still, these figures arrived at the very moment when the country faced a severe shortage in manpower, not only to fill the ranks of the Armed Forces, but also to maintain the critical levels of industrial production that were required to keep the offensive operations in Europe and Asia moving forward.</p>
			<p>Equally important, FDR also had to worry about a growing sense of dissension among the three major Allied powers as the war entered its final phase, and the concomitant disillusionment among the American public that accompanied it. To many observers it was becoming more and more apparent, for example, that the Soviet Union was intent on exerting direct control over Poland, and just as obvious that Churchill’s government was intent on establishing a conservative pro-British regime in Greece—even at the cost of armed conflict with Britain’s former allies, the anti-monarchist and largely communist Greek resistance. Given these developments, some members of Congress argued that the much-heralded principles that had been articulated in the 1941 Atlantic Charter were being crucified in the current Polish and Greek crises. But the most serious issue confronting the President concerned the impact internal Allied tensions might have on the main reason FDR had decided to run for a fourth term: the fate of the United Nations.</p>
			<p>All of these questions weighed heavily on FDR’s mind as he prepared to take on the responsibility of another four years in office. To meet these challenges, FDR had already agreed to make the long journey to the Soviet resort town of Yalta, on the Crimean Peninsula, to converse with his British and Soviet counterparts. Here, the three leaders hoped to solidify their strategy for the final assault on Germany and Japan and come to an understanding over such outstanding issues as the future status of Poland and the structure of the United Nations.</p>
			<p>Of course, the need for security meant that FDR could not divulge the fact that he would be leaving for the Yalta conference a mere two days after he was sworn in as President. But in light of the growing uncertainly in the public’s mind about the direction of the war, he planned to use the occasion of his fourth inaugural as a means to stress the need for Allied unity, and not let the differences that had begun to emerge as the specter of victory appeared on the horizon blind the American people to what he previously termed the “important common and continuing interests in winning the war and building the peace.”</p>
			<p>January 20 was a cold day, with a fresh dusting of snow glistening on the leaves of the nearby magnolia trees. On the steps below the portico, looking up in admiration and wonder, stood all thirteen of the President’s grandchildren, and below them, the hundreds of official guests who filled a special section marked by a canvas spread on the ground to cover the snow. The President had also insisted—in a fitting reminder that the nation was still at war—that amid the crowd of diplomats, governors, members of Congress, and other representatives of Washington officialdom, a space be reserved for a group of fifty wounded servicemen, many of whom, like their Commander-in-Chief, were confined to wheelchairs.</p>
			<p>The first to take the oath of office was Vice President Truman. Then it was FDR’s turn. After making his way to the podium with the help of James and a secret service agent, FDR placed his right hand on his family Bible, and discreetly gripping the reading podium with his left, turned to face US Chief Justice, Harlan Stone. He then swore to faithfully execute the office of President of the United States and to preserve, protect, and defend the nation’s Constitution, “so help me God.”</p>
			<p>With the sight of the Jefferson Memorial glimmering in the distance, FDR began his fourth inaugural address by reminding the American people of the many trials they had yet to face as they struggled to bring the war to an end. The United States and its Allies were passing through “a period of supreme test,” he said, “a test of our courage—of our resolve—of our wisdom—of our essential democracy. If we meet this test—successfully and honorably” he continued, “we shall perform service of historic importance which men and women and children will honor throughout all time.”</p>
			<p>In short, winning the war was not going to be easy. Nor would the transition from war to peace be achieved without a great deal of effort and the occasional setback. Although we may “strive for perfection,” he said, “we may make mistakes” along the way. Still, as his “old schoolmaster, Dr. Peabody, said in days that seemed to us to be secure and untroubled,” we should remember that “Things in life will not always run smoothly. Sometimes we will be rising toward the heights—and then all will seem to reverse itself and start downward.” But the great fact to remember is that “the trend of civilization is forever upward; that a line drawn through the middle of the peaks and valleys of the centuries always has an upward trend.”</p>
			<p>And then, no doubt thinking about the structure of the peace to come, FDR reflected on the character of the American Constitution. It “was not a perfect instrument,” he said; indeed, “it is not perfect yet. But it provided a firm base upon which all manner of men, of all races and colors and creeds, could build our solid structure of democracy.” Having learned through the experience of war that we “cannot live alone at peace,” and that we must be “citizens of the world community,” he urged his fellow countrymen to recognize a lasting peace could not be founded on suspicion or mistrust or fear. Instead, what was needed was the confidence and the courage that flow from conviction, “the conviction that the only way to have a friend is to be one.”</p>
			<p>FDR then closed his address with the observation that the Almighty had blessed the United States in many ways, “He had given our people stout hearts and strong arms with which to strike mighty blows for freedom and truth,” as well as “a faith which has become the hope of all peoples in an anguished world.”</p>
			<p>In many respects, FDR’s fourth inaugural address represents a brief reiteration of the much longer remarks he delivered on the State of the Union on January 6, 1945. On this occasion, FDR not only spoke forcefully about the specific requirements needed to bring the war to a successful conclusion, but also about the critical need for the American people not to lose faith in the process involved in laying the foundations for the future peace of the world, including the creation of the United Nations. His greatest fear was that the American people might turn away from their international responsibilities and revert to the destructive pattern that had followed the last war. Here, his warning about the importance of not expecting “perfection” in his fourth inaugural is of special interest, for as he explained in his State of the Union address, “Perfectionism, no less than isolationism or imperialism or power politics,” might obstruct the paths to international peace. “Let us not forget that the retreat to isolationism a quarter of a century ago was started not by a direct attack against international cooperation but against the alleged imperfections of the peace. In our disillusionment after the last war,” he said, “we preferred international anarchy to international cooperation with Nations which did not see and think exactly as we did. We gave up the hope of gradually achieving a better peace because we had not the courage to fulfill our responsibilities in an admittedly imperfect world. We must not let that happen again,” he continued, “or we shall follow the same tragic road again—the road to a third world war.”</p>
			<p>FDR would not live long enough to see the Allied victory, and the successful establishment of the United Nations that followed. And he was certainly correct when he warned about the numerous imperfections that might well accompany the transition of the world from war to peace. But the post-war international structure he helped establish has not only led to a period of unprecedented economic expansion, it has also helped the world avoid the onset of a new and even more destructive world war. Viewed from this perspective, FDR was surely correct when he argued that the American people should never forget that they “cannot live alone at peace,” and will forever remain “citizens of the world community.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
