<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Peanut Farmer: The Inaugural Address of Jimmy Carter: by Mark Atwood Lawrence</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-106" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Peanut Farmer: The Inaugural Address of Jimmy Carter</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Mark Atwood Lawrence</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Reflecting on the day he became the thirty-ninth president of the United States, Jimmy Carter recorded a revealing shard of memory in his diary. Even though he had pursued the nation’s highest office with uncommon energy over many months, Carter wrote, he was “genuinely surprised” when the Bishop of Minnesota, in delivering the benediction at the inauguration ceremonies, bestowed “blessings on President Carter.” The words “President Carter” were “startling to me,” he recalls.</p>
			<p>The whole day, January 20, 1977, was like that for Carter. Rarely had a newly elected president been less invested in the pomp and fanfare that usually went with the nation’s highest office. The former governor of Georgia—a peanut farmer quick to extoll his small-town roots—wore a store-bought suit and a borrowed overcoat. He passed up the traditional inaugural service at the stately St. John’s Episcopal Church near the White House, joining instead his coreligionists at the humbler First Baptist Church several blocks away. He declined to hold the usual inaugural luncheon.</p>
			<p>Following his swearing-in, Carter made his most striking gesture of the day. Moments after boarding a limousine for the mile-and-a-half ride to the White House, he ordered the driver to stop, got out, and began strolling down Pennsylvania Avenue hand in hand with First Lady Rosalynn, while their 9-year-old daughter Amy ambled—and sometimes skipped—alongside. Carter hoped his walk would offer a “tangible indication of some reduction in the imperial status of the president and his family.” It worked. The crowds along the parade route warmly cheered the Carters, who won broad acclaim for the egalitarianism they projected.</p>
			<p>Less celebrated was Carter’s inaugural address, hardly a masterpiece of the genre. To be sure, the speech earned dutiful applause and respectful coverage at the time. But it has seldom garnered favorable comment from historians and biographers. It was, writes historian Randall Balmer, a “workmanlike” mélange of well-worn themes from the campaign. Biographer Jonathan Alter calls the speech “disjointed” and “loosely structured,” gentle ways of critiquing the lack of intellectual coherence, poetic flow, or emotional punch.</p>
			<p>Better speechwriting might have helped knit Carter’s ideas together into something more powerful, and a more polished delivery—almost always an elusive goal for Carter—might have left a better impression. But there was a more fundamental reason why Carter fell well short of the grandest inaugural orations. The speech’s tepidness owed much to the very modesty that had enabled Carter to win the White House and underlay his most memorable gestures on Inauguration Day. To have asked Carter for something grander would have meant asking him to be a different sort of leader and to have understood the national mood in a different way.</p>
			<p>The address oozed humility. Indeed, perhaps the most extraordinary moment came when Carter thanked his predecessor and political rival, Gerald R. Ford, an unprecedented gesture of selflessness in an inaugural speech. Otherwise, the address stands out for its brevity (1,228 words, taking a mere 14 and a half minutes to deliver) and studied lack of pretension. Carter opened by quoting not the founding fathers or other luminaries of American history but his high school teacher, Miss Julia Coleman, whose admonition to her students in a humble Georgia schoolhouse—“We must adjust to changing times and still hold to unchanging principles”—set the tone for everything that followed.</p>
			<p>Aides talked Carter out of going so far as to quote a Biblical passage (2 Chronicles 7:14) condemning “wicked ways” and calling for national healing through forgiveness of “sin.” Such fervid self-criticism seemed too strong for Americans who did not share Carter’s particular brand of Christianity. But the verse Carter selected instead—Micah 6:8—sent a broadly similar message by stressing his dedication to justice, mercy, and walking “humbly” with God. And Carter retained other notes of self-effacement in his text. “Your strength can compensate for my weakness,” he told the American people, “and your wisdom can help to minimize my mistakes.”</p>
			<p>Carter hit much the same theme when he turned from his personal shortcomings to the nation’s. “We have learned that 'more' is not necessarily 'better,' that even our great nation has its recognized limits, and that we can neither answer all questions nor solve all problems,” Carter averred in perhaps the most arresting lines of the speech. He appealed for a “spirit of individual sacrifice for the common good,” urging that Americans “must simply do our best” rather than striving to do everything.</p>
			<p>These words unquestionably suited the political moment. Although America’s bicentennial in 1976 had triggered a wave of patriotic fanfare, Carter’s rise to the presidency took place against a backdrop of national setbacks and demoralization. The Watergate scandal, culminating in Richard Nixon’s resignation in 1974, caused many Americans to distrust the integrity, even the decency, of their leaders. America’s final defeat in Vietnam the following year stirred profound doubts about the nation’s entitlement to global leadership and the efficacy of the vast material power it wielded. Soaring inflation and other economic difficulties suggested, meanwhile, that the postwar economic boom was over. Cities crumbled, and environmental woes multiplied. All in all, as California Governor Jerry Brown put it in 1976, an “era of limits” appeared to be at hand.</p>
			<p>Carter’s victory in the 1976 presidential race owed much to his image as a political outsider innocent of the corruption and error that had led the nation astray. From the moment he declared his candidacy, he gained traction largely because of who he was—a morally upright man who promised never to lie to the American people—and the promises of contrition and renewal that he offered. By the time of his inaugural, his professions of humility had become routine. If Americans looked past the speech and remembered other moments in a long day of political pageantry, it’s not difficult to understand why.</p>
			<p>The cost of Carter’s approach—apparently one he was willing to pay—was a missed opportunity to highlight some intriguing big ideas that ran, if only vaguely, through the speech. These ideas were not entirely new, and Carter would articulate all of them more fully on other occasions. But if Carter had invoked them more eloquently at the outset of his administration, they might have resonated more powerfully with the public, helping to cast Carter in a glow of not just moral conviction but also ingenuity and vision. Three such insights in particular stand out, all of which deserve to be recalled in 2021 at another moment of national doubt.</p>
			<p>First, Carter called attention to his commitment to the advancement of human rights as a core concern of <abbr class="initialism">U.S.</abbr> foreign policy. “Our moral sense dictates a clearcut preference,” he insisted, “for these societies which share with us an abiding respect for individual human rights.” What made the point especially notable was Carter’s suggestion that dedication to principle would not undercut American power, as the Republican administrations of the earlier 1970s had tended to believe. Rather, Carter insisted “the trust which our nation earns” through adherence to its core values “is essential to our strength.” More abstractly, he declared that the pursuit of “moral duties” seemed “invariably to be in our own best interests.”</p>
			<p>Second, Carter proposed a military policy that would balance the pursuit of arms control with the preservation of national strength. The president’s dedication to arms reduction was plain to see, as it had been throughout the campaign. “We pledge perseverance and wisdom in our efforts to limit the world’s armaments to those necessary for each nation’s own domestic safety,” intoned Carter, suggesting a desire for deterrence at minimum levels of weaponry. He even held out “the elimination of all nuclear weapons from this Earth” as his ultimate goal. But, as usual with Carter, peacemaking ambitions coexisted with a concern for national defense befitting a former Naval officer. While the United States would never seek to “intimidate” its foes, he declared, “it is clear that a world which others can dominate with impunity would be inhospitable to decency and a threat to the well-being of all people.”</p>
			<p>Third, Carter declared his dedication to making the government not only more “compassionate” but also—a word easy to miss among the jumble of more high-minded adjectives—“competent.” He declared that his inauguration marked a “new beginning” for the nation and encapsulated a “new spirit” among Americans. In a slight contradiction, he even suggested that a “serious and purposeful rekindling of confidence” had already taken hold across American society. But his more intriguing assertion was to herald a “new dedication within our Government”—the start, he hoped, of a new era in which Americans could be “proud” of what occurred in Washington.</p>
			<p>Carter went no further with this theme or, for that matter, any other elements of domestic or foreign policy. In sticking to broad generalities, he was, of course, hardly alone; few presidents have used their inaugurals to engage the intricacies of policy matters. Moreover, Carter had good reason to believe that his primary task at the outset of his administration was to establish a new tone as the country grappled with pervasive doubt and distrust. Low national morale was a real problem.</p>
			<p>Yet the speech fell short of Carter at his best. A master of detail who was often criticized for micromanagement of complicated policy issues, Carter showed few hints of the intellectual command that had made him an effective leader back in Georgia. His repeated expressions of humility, meanwhile, highlighted traits that many Americans would come to see as naïveté and excessive meekness as the United States faced mounting economic woes as well as foreign policy crises in the later years of his term. The political mood that brought Carter to office proved fleeting. By1980, many Americans had lost interest in the genuine innovations that Carter espoused and rallied around a very different notion of renewal associated with Ronald Reagan and a revitalized nationalist wing of the Republican Party.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
