<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 90</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-90" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of Harry S. Truman</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Andrew E. Busch</h3>
			<p>Harry S. Truman took the oath of office on January 20, 1949 after having been elected in one of the most dramatic political upsets in American history. He had served nearly all of what would have been Franklin Roosevelt’s fourth term after Roosevelt’s death in April 1945. He had big shoes to fill, and the consensus by political prognosticators—and more than a few ordinary citizens—was that he was falling short.  Labor unrest, inflation, shortages, and remaining wartime restrictions added up to a challenging environment for the incumbent.</p>
			<p>In the 1946 midterm elections, Republicans made big gains, winning majorities in the House and Senate for the first time since 1930. Even Democrats were so convinced of Truman’s impending doom that Arkansas Senator William Fulbright suggested that Truman appoint a Republican Secretary of State and then resign, a maneuver that would have given Republicans the presidency under the order of presidential succession in place at the time. In domestic policy, Truman and the new Congress clashed repeatedly, with Congress passing a large tax cut and the Taft-Hartley Act, hated by organized labor, over Truman’s veto. His proposed civil rights program and other reforms designed to complete the New Deal languished. At the same time, Truman worked closely with Republicans to obtain passage of the Marshall Plan to rebuild Western Europe, aid to Greece and Turkey, and the National Security Act of 1947 creating the Defense Department, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, and the National Security Council.</p>
			<p>In 1948, Truman was nominated by Democrats to serve another term as president, but the party was split. On one side, Strom Thurmond ran as a “States Rights Democrat”—or Dixiecrat—hoping to punish Truman for his civil rights stand by winning enough Southern electors to throw the election into the House of Representatives. On the other side, former Vice President Henry Wallace ran as the candidate of the Progressive Party, a coalition of far-left Democrats and communists. Wallace sought to punish Truman for his policy of anti-communist containment by siphoning off Democratic votes in northern and western states.</p>
			<p>Polling, which was in its infancy, showed Truman far behind Republican challenger Thomas Dewey, the Governor of New York. Dewey played it safe, relying on vague platitudes and a leisurely speaking schedule. Truman was fiery and energetic (some said demagogic). He called Congress into special session and dared it to pass a number of liberal measures endorsed by Dewey, exploiting the longstanding rift between the Republicans’ presidential wing and their more conservative congressional wing. When Congress failed to act, he slapped the label of the “Do-Nothing 80th Congress” on it and campaigned for a change on Capitol Hill.</p>
			<p>In the end, Truman won despite the unanimous prediction of the “experts.” It was not a huge win, but it was solid. Truman won 49.6 percent of the nationally-aggregated popular vote to Dewey’s 45.1 percent; Thurmond and Wallace each won 2.4 per cent. More importantly, Truman held a 303 to 183 advantage in Electoral Votes. Thurmond’s 39 in Southern states was not enough to derail the President. When he returned to Washington after voting in Missouri, Truman gleefully held aloft the blazing, premature headline of the Chicago Tribune: <b>Dewery Defeats Truman</b>. His fight against the GOP Congress was also successful, as Democrats regained their majorities in both House and Senate.</p>
			<p>Harry Truman’s inaugural address contained some historically-typical features. One was an appeal to unity after a contentious campaign. “The tasks we face are difficult,” Truman said, “and we can accomplish them only if we work together.” Another was frequent appeal to God, an important element of American political culture found in almost every presidential inaugural address since 1789.</p>
			<p>What made Truman’s address unique to that point—though less unique after—was the fact that it focused almost entirely on the world. It is easy to understand why he adopted that focus. The Cold War with the Soviet Union was underway in earnest. Since 1945, the Soviets had incorporated into their empire the countries of Eastern Europe, most recently through a communist coup d’etat engineered in Czechoslovakia in early 1948. Even as Truman spoke, Berlin was under siege, its land corridors to the West cut off by the Soviets. The free part of the city was now completely dependent on a massive airlift. Some in Washington had counseled preventive war while the U.S. still had a nuclear monopoly, but Truman had resisted.</p>
			<p>Looking out at the world, Truman perceived that “It may be our lot to experience, and in large measure to bring about, a major turning point in the long history of the human race.” The first half of the century, Truman noted, had seen unprecedented assaults on human rights and destructive warfare never before seen; thus, “The supreme need of our time is for men to learn to live together in peace and harmony.” Of course, Truman himself had witnessed firsthand the destruction of the First World War, in which he served as an artillery officer, and he had borne the heavy responsibility of decision regarding the use of atomic bombs to end the Second.</p>
			<p>The president held that the foundation for America’s efforts abroad would be its religious and civic faith, “that all men have a right to equal justice and equal opportunity to share in the common good…that all men have the right to freedom of thought and expression. We believe that all men are created equal because they are created in the image of God.” To this summation of the Declaration of Independence, Truman contrasted the regime and the ideology which opposed not just the United States but people around the world who wanted to be free. Communism, Truman observed, opposed self-government, crushed the individual, and embraced violence as the only route to justice and war as the inevitable solution to international disputes. The actions resulting from the communist ideology “are a threat to the efforts of free nations to bring about world recovery and lasting peace.”</p>
			<p>Truman touted the Marshall Plan as an example of what the United States was already doing in cooperation with others to advance the cause of recovery and peace. “We are ready,” he added, “to undertake new projects to strengthen the free world,” falling under four “major courses for action:”</p>
			<li>
				<ol>“continue to give unfaltering support to the United Nations and related agencies;”</ol>
				<ol>“continue our programs for world economic recovery;”</ol>
				<ol>“strengthen freedom-loving nations against the dangers of aggression;” and</ol>
				<ol>“embark on a bold new program for making the benefits of our scientific advances and industrial progress available for the improvement and growth of underdeveloped areas.”</ol>
			</li>
			<p>Truman briefly elaborated each point. The most potentially-controversial was point number 3, which Truman explained by reference to a new North Atlantic security arrangement he would soon be proposing to Congress. That arrangement was, of course, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), based on the principle that an attack upon one is an attack upon all. NATO would become a key piece of the American strategy of collective security up to the present day. As Truman put it. “If we can make it sufficiently clear, in advance, that any armed attack affecting our national security would be met with overwhelming force, the armed attack might never occur.”</p>
			<p>After laying out his goals, Truman expanded upon the superiority of democracy, which alone could provide the dynamism and growth necessary for progress among nations. In his one brief nod to domestic affairs, he acknowledged that “If we are to be successful in carrying out these policies, it is clear that we must have continued prosperity in this country and we must keep ourselves strong.”</p>
			<p>The president wrapped up his address by returning to the theme with which he began:</p>
			<p><blockquote>Events have brought our American democracy to new influence and new responsibilities. They will test our courage, our devotion to duty, and our concept of liberty. But I say to all men, what we have achieved in liberty, we will surpass in greater liberty. Steadfast in our faith in the Almighty, we will advance toward a world where man’s freedom is secure.  To that end, we will devote our strength, our resources, and our firmness of resolve.</blockquote></p>
			<p>Truman’s inaugural address wound up being a serviceable blueprint for the next four years. Except for an important amendment to the Social Security Act, not much happened in domestic affairs; the administration was as focused on the world in practice as Truman had been rhetorically. In 1950, Truman committed the United States to the defense of South Korea after it was invaded by its communist neighbor to the North—a devotion of national strength, resources, and resolve that ultimately saved South Korea and established the seriousness of the containment policy but also consumed the remainder of the Truman presidency.</p>
			<p>More broadly, Truman’s address marked the triumph of liberal, anti-communist internationalism as something resembling the consensus foreign policy of the United States for the next two decades. America First isolationism was out, as was the Henry Wallace Popular Front with Stalin. Not until Vietnam was the consensus shattered in the Democratic Party, and even then most of the pieces were picked up and revivified by Ronald Reagan. While little came of Truman’s domestic Fair Deal, the foreign policy themes that dominated his 1949 inaugural address were not forgotten.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
