<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Little Magician: The Inaugural Address of Martin Van Buren: by Michael J. Gerhardt</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">The Little Magician: The Inaugural Address of Martin Van Buren</h2>
				<h3><i>by</i> Michael J. Gerhardt</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>America’s seventh president, Andrew Jackson, was a hard act to follow, especially for the man who succeeded him, Martin Van Buren. Jackson led the popular vote all three times he ran for the presidency (1824, 1828, 1832). While not all Americans loved Jackson, he had a humble background, was anti-elitist, championed the common man against rapacious big businesses, and was the first president to stand firmly against secession. Stubborn to a fault, Jackson issued a directive in the final year of his presidency that prohibited the use of paper money in the purchase of federal lands. In his first few weeks in office, Van Buren watched helplessly as Jackson’s move provoked foreclosures and bank failures, which led to the nation’s first great depression.</p>
			<p>Whereas Jackson manifested the toughness he wished to embody, Van Buren was well known for his wiliness and penchant for compromise. When Jackson reshuffled his cabinet to rid it of those who felt allegiance to his first Vice-President John Calhoun, Van Buren agreed to relinquish his position as Secretary of State in favor of serving as the Minister to Great Britain. But, when Calhoun cast the tie-breaking vote to reject Van Buren’s nomination as Minister to Great Britain, Van Buren instantly became a martyr for Jackson’s cause. Jackson picked him as his running mate in the 1832 election, and Jackson paved the way for Van Buren to win the party’s nomination in 1836 and the ensuing presidential election of 1836.</p>
			<p>The scene of Van Buren’s inaugural on March 4, 1837, delighted Jackson: Swearing in his chosen successor was Chief Justice Roger Taney, Jackson’s long-time adviser whom Jackson had helped to secure the post after the Senate had rejected his nominations for Treasury Secretary and Associate Justice on the Court. But while the ceremony was a triumph for Jackson, it was not for Van Buren, who could take pride in becoming the first native-born American to become president but had the challenge on that day both to demonstrate his commitment to Jackson’s policies and popular support <em>and</em> his own toughness to fight, like Jackson, big business, an overreaching federal government, and secession.</p>
			<p>Van Buren’s inaugural address demonstrated that he was no Jackson. Whereas Jackson spoke plainly and directly, Van Buren spoke formally and cautiously, ever mindful of the traps he had to avoid ahead. Van Buren had not been formally educated, but he had the presence of a man who overcompensated for his humble beginnings. Looking back on that day, Jackson’s long-time ally, Senator Thomas Hart Benton, aptly observed, “For once, the rising sun was eclipsed by the setting sun.”</p>
			<p>The first sentence of Van Buren’s inaugural address gave an indication of where Van Buren was going—nearly eight lines long when put down in writing. He “cheerfully” agreed to “fulfill” the obligation set by his predecessors of delivering an inaugural, a sentiment he took 49 words to express. He went downhill from there, abandoning any pretense of being the verbal pugilist that Jackson was. Instead, he launched into a long disquisition—comprised of 12 of the addresses’ 18 long paragraphs underscoring his humility by retelling the story of America up until that moment. The longest paragraph of the entire address is the 13th, which addressed “the institution of domestic slavery.” Van Buren recounted some of the country’s early history in wrestling with that problem before he explained his “solemn duty” as a candidate to have “declared that if the desire of those of my countrymen who were favorable to my election was gratified ‘I must go into the Presidential chair the inflexible and uncompromising opponent of every attempt on the part of Congress to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia against the wishes of the slaveholding states, and also with a determination equally decided to resist the slightest interference with it in the States where it exists.’” This is Van Buren taking a strong stand: He was more lawyer than politician in trying to soften flashpoints of disagreement by using the least incendiary rhetoric he could to make his points. This kind of talk was classic Van Buren in trying mightily to please his audience while committing himself to a policy unpleasing to many. Van Buren placed these remarks roughly in the middle of his address, thus making it nearly impossible to reassure the very people he wanted to reassure. They wanted bluster and boldness but they got the opposite—calmly worded bromides, long disquisitions of history, and reluctance to showcase his strongest stand.</p>
			<p>This paragraph continues to nearly the end of his speech when he finally spoke directly to the audience before him and those reading the address later: “For myself, therefore, I desire to declare that the principle that will govern me in the high duty to which my country calls me is a strict adherence to the letter and spirit of the Constitution as it was designed by those who framed it.” “I shall endeavor,” he added later in the same long paragraph (after recounting the origins of the Constitution), “to preserve, protect, and defend it anxiously referring to its direction in every action. To matters of domestic concernment which it has intrusted to the Federal Government and to such as relate to our intercourse with foreign nations I shall zealously devote myself; beyond those limits I shall never pass.” Van Buren echoed Jackson’s commitment to what has become known as original meaning as the touchstone of constitutional law.</p>
			<p>Van Buren was pronouncing how he would govern and interpret the nation’s preeminent governing document, but he was also repeating himself and failing to frame anything memorable in his rhetoric. Van Buren, of course, was entitled as the duly elected president to speak in his own voice, but it was not a voice that convinced anyone he was a man of the people like Jackson. The verbiage confirmed his image as a clever politician that one had to watch carefully to keep in check.</p>
			<p>After two long paragraphs about his approach to foreign policy (declaring he had little “discretion” to deviate from Jackson’s “uniform and intelligible” foreign policy), Van Buren arrived at his last two paragraphs. He concluded the first of these with his promise “to bring with me a settled purpose to maintain the institutions of my country, which I trust will atone for the errors I commit.” The more protestations of humility he made, the less tough he sounded and the more like a regular politician whom Jackson’s followers detested. Jacksonians did not want any career politicians but instead a man who shared their experiences and values as common folk. Van Buren had come into the presidency as a career politician; he sounded and looked like one. But, having been out of the country for a year before he became Vice-President in 1836, he was not a familiar face or presence to most Americans, but, through his inaugural, he was reminding everyone that he was exactly what his critics charged—a career politician more interested in helping himself than in helping others, especially those who needed the government to stand with them against the big businesses that were gouging them.</p>
			<p>Most of the last paragraph was devoted to reminding Americans he had served under Jackson for many years and was “a daily witness of his exclusive and unsurpassed devotion to his country’s welfare, agreeing with him in sentiments which his countrymen have warmly supported, and permitted to partake largely of his confidence . . .” He praised Jackson further and then the nation before “throw[ing] myself without fear on its justice and its kindness” and looking for guidance to Jackson and the “Divine Being whose strengthening support I humbly solicit . . .”</p>
			<p>The address sounded many of the right notes for Van Buren, but it sowed more doubts than confidence that Van Buren could ever be as tough as Jackson in opposing the forces preying on the common people who were his supporters. Van Buren served his country for many years—as a senator, as the attorney general and governor of New York, as Secretary of State, Minister to Great Britain, and now as president. His resume, loyalty to Jackson, and humility could not save him from political disaster when, just weeks after his address, and the nation confronted its first great depression. The crisis required boldness, imagination, and empathy, but Van Buren was not the man who could deliver these when he needed to and lost reelection in 1840.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
