<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 52</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-52" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of Rutherford B. Hayes</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Dustin McLochlin</h3>
			<p>When Rutherford B. Hayes gave his inaugural address on March 5, 1877, it was only three days removed from Congress confirming his victory over his opponent Samuel Tilden of New York. For four months the two parties fought over the returns, which initially appeared to show a clear victory for Tilden. But Republicans noticed that if Hayes carried the three close Southern states of Louisiana, Florida, and South Carolina, he would win the election by one electoral vote.</p>
			<p>Once the Republican party halted the results, both parties sent delegates to the three states in question to find evidence for their side’s victory. Predictably, both determined their candidate had won. To break this stalemate, Congress created an Electoral Commission of 15 members. The Democratic party supported this in heavier numbers because they hoped the deciding member of the commission would be David Davis whom they believed would side with their party. But, he resigned the court and the deciding spot went to Joseph Bradley who sided with the Republicans. Upon looking at all of the state returns, the Commission voted strictly down party lines and determined Hayes was the victor.</p>
			<p>Partly because of the drama that surrounded Hayes’s confirmation, Chief Justice Morrison Waite, through the direction of Ulysses S. Grant, swore Hayes into the presidency two days early in the White House on March 3. Hayes’s public inauguration on March 5, therefore, was truly ceremonial.</p>
			<p>Since the Civil War ended, the major political topic was Reconstruction, and this election year had been no different. But, by the time of Hayes’s inauguration, the Reconstruction project had been ongoing for nearly 12 years, and the continued presence of federal troops in the South became increasingly tenuous as Southern states were readmitted into the Union, culminating in the seating of Georgia Senator Jonah Hill in February 1871. Despite the formal reintroduction of all of the rebellious Southern states, the use of Union troops remained in a limbo of questionable constitutional legality. The true tenuousness of this continued presence led to many climactic moments including in Louisiana when the Army moved to defend the Republican governor from a Democratic coup in 1874. Public opinion seemed to teeter between the federal government upholding state democratic institutions or allowing states to run their own affairs (which was a tacit acceptance of white dominance and disenfranchisement of black men). If the federal government no longer had the will of the people to oversee the actions of Southern states, then a new course needed to be charted. It was in this milieu that Hayes took the office, and his speech reflects this understanding.</p>
			<p>A strong adherent to his interpretation of the Constitution, Hayes felt it was time the South was allowed “local self-government,” especially now that the nation had passed the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments. We can see his insistence on the South abiding by those amendment as well as the rest of the Constitution when he argues for “accepting and obeying faithfully the whole Constitution as it is” (emphasis mine). His focus on the Constitution is especially purposeful here since he says “constitution” or “constitutional” seven times in his section on the South, only using the word to other times throughout the rest of his speech. But his hope for Southern adherence to these amendments was of little use without some plan for long-term sustainability. And, for Hayes, it was in the belief that the division along party lines in the South was based upon the racial question. He felt that once “bayonet rule” came to an end, then people would vote on other concerns. Southern former-Whigs who had more in common with the Republicans would, thus, abandon their Democratic allegiance and provide a larger umbrella of voters for the Republican party in the South. Implicit in this plan, was a further assumption that a Southern black man would also be free to vote Democratic if he felt it aligned with his beliefs, thus Southern white men would not feel compelled to terrorize these potential voters.</p>
			<p>Hayes was attempting to chart a new course that was doomed for failure. Perhaps Hayes was naïve, or he was accepting a course and hoped for the best, despite his limited options. Regardless, to historians this election and the outcome in South Carolina and Louisiana would be an ending point to Reconstruction.</p>
			<p>While the gravity of the racial question in the post-Civil War was the most pressing, and needed to be addressed directly, all of Hayes subsequent policy statements fed into his path forward beyond Reconstruction policies. First, through Civil Service reform, Hayes hoped to find an avenue into bridging the gap between the North and South (and, therefore, Republican and Democrat). He called for a “thorough, radical, and complete” reform, and felt on solid ground with this because “both the great political parties … gave a prominent place to the subject of reform of our civil service.” In is in this context that he made the statement that resonated the most with the nation, proclaiming “he serves the party best who serves the country best.” This line, mostly borrowed from his eventual Secretary of the Interior Carl Schurz, highlighted that reform was not a partisan issue that serving your country was a better means of upholding the honorability of your party, not attempting to maintain its dominance through political appointment. And, a means to combat this political machinery was perhaps through an amendment to change presidential appointments to a single, six-year term. Hayes had pledged a single term in his nomination letter, and this one-term pronouncement was an argument that, in his opinion, presidential first terms were merely used as a vehicle to establish enough of a machine for reelection.</p>
			<p>Charting a course of Civil Service reform was not without its perils within his own party. Politicians like Roscoe Conkling of New York made a career working with the machine politics system. In fact, Conkling was a prominent name to potentially unseat James Blaine of Maine who was the front runner for the Republican nomination in 1876. Only through the split between Conkling and Blaine supporters did Hayes even ascend to the nomination since many Conkling supporters would rather take their chances with the unknown Hayes rather than accepting Blaine. When Hayes made his intentions clear on civil service, Conkling only half-heartedly supported Hayes over Tilden.</p>
			<p>While Civil Service reform undoubtedly created rifts within the Republican party, which Hayes might want to avoid, his stance on the economy had the potential of creating rifts within the Democratic party, in which Hayes hoped. The economic panic, which started in 1873, showed signs of recovery by 1877, but discussing his belief in elimination “irredeemable paper currency” showed that he was attempting to win over the “hard money” element of the Democratic party who were most likely to be former Whigs. In fact, the Democratic ticket included the hard money Tilden, and the “soft money” Vice Presidential nominee Thomas Hendricks.</p>
			<p>Hayes makes room for one more policy announcement before his closing remarks. But this pronouncement is much more a conciliatory note to Grant and his wing of the party than Hayes laying out his foreign policy objectives. While the statement itself says little other than Hayes’s intention to continue Grant’s policy of “submitting to arbitration grave questions in dispute,” Hayes had made a number of choices in his nomination letter that were seen as direct rebukes to Grant and his administration. His civil service pledge could be seen as an attack on Grant and his connection to Roscoe Conkling’s wing of the Republican party, and his call for a single term came after a time when many thought Grant would attempt a third term (which he did the following election). Hayes knew he needed to embrace Grant, and hopefully his wing, in some level during his inaugural address.</p>
			<p>All of this was unquestionably in the backdrop of the dubious way upon which Hayes was confirmed as the president, and Hayes had to make some mention. Playing the role of the conciliator Hayes calls for everyone to move forward from the decision made by the electoral commission (he calls it the “tribunal”). In this discussion we see many conciliatory statements given to Democrats, and Southerners, that perhaps the Electoral Commission did err in its judgment. And, while can commend Hayes for sympathizing with the opposing party for its differing view on the outcome, we should also commend him for understanding the peaceful transfer of power and pointing out that regardless of the outcome there needs to be a general “acquiescence” to the outcome even if individuals may not like Hayes. This acceptance of democracy above personal ambition was an important element of this contentious outcome.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
