<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 126</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-126" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>The Inaugural Address of Donald Trump</h2>
			<h3><i>by</i> Nicholas F. Jacobs</h3>
			<p>The morning of Friday, January 20, 2017 began as one might expect. The peaceful and orderly transition of presidential power to the 45th President, Donald John Trump, contained all the pomp and circumstance of the traditional Washingtonian affair: morning church services at <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Episcopal Church across from the White House, followed by tea with the Obama’s; the incoming and outgoing presidents shared a motorcade down Pennsylvania Avenue to the Capitol. In the aftermath of one of the most bitterly contested elections in American history, featuring two of the most historically disliked candidates for office, Trump’s Inauguration Day festivities seemed to clamor for a return to normalcy. Welcoming the crowds that had gathered on the Mall to hear the new president speak, Senator Roy Blunt echoed all the trappings of the day’s symbolic importance, quoting Jefferson, Lincoln, <abbr class="initialism">FDR</abbr>, Kennedy, and Reagan in a quick three-minute speech. After all, he argued, presidential inaugurals were “not a celebration of victory, but a celebration of democracy,” that every American could, and should, honor.</p>
			<p>But as he had done so many times before, Trump shattered those expectations. For the newly-sworn in president, Inauguration Day&mdash;politics in general&mdash;was only ever about winning. Trump had built a personal brand around the idea that, in life, as in business, there are only winners or losers. As president, he was to be no loser.</p>
			<p>Trump won the Electoral College, although he lost the popular vote by 2.8 million ballots. No matter, this was a day when “the people” would “start winning again, winning like never before.” Standing before former presidents, Congressional leaders, and other long-serving political dignitaries Trump spoke about “their victories,” but echoed his campaign’s central refrain that “their triumphs have not been your triumphs.”</p>
			<p>Contemporaneous accounts of Trump’s speech use a variety of adjectives to describe his message: unprecedented, dismal, nationalist, authoritarian, populist. But more than anything else, the simplistic and unadorned notion of “winning” defines the address, as it defines so much of Trump’s public philosophy: the purpose of government is to help those that win, and to help them keep winning; winners get to rule and losers must accept their fate; especially in the global arena, Americans must win first. Despite his speech’s relative simplicity and brevity, this single idea captures much about the state of American politics on the eve of Trump’s inaugural, and what the next four years under a Trump administration would bring. There were winners and losers in politics&mdash;no middle ground.</p>
			<p>Steve Bannon, one of the architects of Trump’s campaign and likely co-author of the speech, often commented that its anti-establishment rhetoric and disdain for convention were in homage to Andrew Jackson’s grassroots assault on America’s governing institutions in the mid-1800<abbr>s.</abbr> In this view, Trump was tapping into a deep history of populist protest, led by strong presidents. Trump’s speech, however, was decidedly modern. Even Jackson’s inaugural referenced the Constitution, and the limits it contained on executive power; even Jackson gave “reverence” for “the examples of public virtue left by my illustrious predecessors.” For Trump, compromise, moderation, and restraint were not ancient virtues, but rather outdated excuses made by “a small group in our nation’s Capital,” the real victors, who perpetually “reaped the rewards of government while the people have borne the cost.”</p>
			<p>Trump styled himself as a leader of a new movement&mdash;a movement, ironically, of losers. Days leading up to the inaugural, Trump supporters celebrated at “DeploraBalls”&mdash;galas named in homage to Hillary Clinton’s off-the-cuff remark that most of her electoral opponents’ supporters could be placed in what she liked to call “the basket of deplorables.” On the campaign trail, as in his inaugural, Trump described the communities in which his movement thrived as one in a state of permanent decline: “trapped in poverty,” “deprived of knowledge,” “robbed⁠ ⁠… of unrealized potential,” the victims of “American carnage.” Unlike other catastrophes that elevated presidents to office and motivated their calls to unity, Trump portrayed this crisis as one purposefully and deliberately constructed by a ruling class, and which disproportionately affected his followers, the “righteous public.”</p>
			<p>For most of those listening to Donald Trump’s address, this was, perhaps, an unrecognizable image of their country. But, to those that voted for Trump, there was enough truth in his message to catapult him into office. As Hillary Clinton would pointedly recognize two years after losing, “I won the places that represent two-thirds of America’s gross domestic product. So I won the places that are optimistic, diverse, dynamic, moving forward, and his whole campaign, ‘make America great again,’ was looking backwards.” Trump won, in other words, the losers in the new global economy. Trump won because he blamed the recognizable, if simplistic problems of open-borders, immigrants, racial antagonisms, China’s unfair business practices, and a ruling elite who profited from the arrangement, including, and perhaps most importantly, members of his own Republican Party. Of course, poor Americans also voted for Clinton as did the wealthy vote for Trump, but Clinton’s comments are a testament to the bi-partisan legitimacy bestowed on Trump’s self-serving idea of a deeply fractured America. Whether it was objectively true is largely beside the point. Perceptions are what counts in politics, and Trump seemed to understand that more than most of his opponents were willing to concede.</p>
			<p>The administration’s obsession with the image of winning defined its governing approach from the start. Trump became the first president to formally declare his re-election campaign on Inauguration Day. Barely 24 hours had passed before the White House called its first press conference to accuse the media of intentionally portraying the new president as a loser, because the crowds at his inauguration were visibly smaller than those of the Women’s March on Washington&mdash;a hundreds of thousands sized rally the day after Inauguration Day, largely in protest of the new president’s perceived hostility to reproductive rights and gender equality. The president’s chief political advisor and former campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, gave an unvarnished view of the White House’s decision to challenge the reporting. Conway’s claim that the administration simply gave “alternative facts” to the media’s narrative captured the political double-speak or absurdity of the false numbers the White House produced about T.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. ratings and attendance. But more so, it was demonstrable proof of Trump’s demand that he be seen as a winner. And winners do not have fewer attendees at their inaugural than the president you supposedly repudiated.</p>
			<p>Throughout his term, the former reality T.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. star’s actions fit the pattern he established on Inauguration Day. He bragged about large crowds and maintained an exhausting schedule of rallies that crisscrossed the nation&mdash;a “thank you tour” that he continued even after he took the oath of office. He intentionally refused to play to presidential expectations&mdash;from shrugging off questions about whether he would use his powers to go after political opponents, to refusing to condemn white supremacists in the aftermath of Neo-Nazi demonstrations in Charlottesville, Virginia. No matter his personal sympathies, any other course of action would have suggested that somebody had power over what the president could or should say. That is how losers talk.</p>
			<p>Accepting the party’s nomination at the Republican National Convention in 2016, he declared that he “alone” could fix America’s ailments. Whereas other presidents had downplayed the degree to which they relied on executive authority, Trump staged carefully choreographed media ops for almost every executive order he signed, always lifting them up for the cameras to capture his bold signature at the bottom of the page. He signed his first, a largely symbolic order to undermine the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, just after his inaugural parade ended. Throughout his campaign, Trump promised to “Make America Great Again”&mdash;not wealthier, more equal, or run with smaller government. Understanding that “greatness” is always in the eye of the beholder, Trump’s approach to the presidency reflected the orientation of an image-obsessed brand-builder. On June 1, 2020, Trump returned to <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, in the midst of nation-wide protests with systemic racism and police violence&mdash;an extraordinary moment of public acknowledgement that any promise of American greatness means addressing these enduring challenges. In contrast, and after ordering the National Guard to disperse peaceful protestors with tear gas, Trump invited the press to photograph him holding up a bible in front of the damaged church&mdash;the image of a president in control, and winning.</p>
			<p>With time, we will be able to place Trump’s presidency in full historical relief. His actions and rhetoric are so raw that it is near impossible to recognize their consequences in the same way that we might interpret a Roosevelt’s or Adamses. Nevertheless, I would argue that most accounts fail to acknowledge the coherent message that motivated Trump’s campaign for office and his presidency. Some will say that Trump painted a false image of American decline for his political benefit or that he cared about nothing more than his personal aggrandizement. I cannot peer into Trump’s mind and unravel his motives. Over 74 million Americans voted to re-elect Donald Trump&mdash;over 11 million more votes than he first received. This was no mere cult of personality. As unconventional and jarring as his Inaugural Address was, it makes clear his commitment to leading a movement of Americans who genuinely felt themselves as disenfranchised, voiceless, and, for too long, on the losing side. Especially since Trump did lose re-election, those feelings are not likely to dissipate anytime soon.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
