<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			<blockquote>
				<p>I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Article II, Section I of the United States Constitution states that before entering upon the president's duties, the president-elect must take an oath. It does not require that the president then deliver an inaugural address to the nation. But nations are built on tradition as much as on laws. Traditions evolve, certainly—the first inaugural address was delivered in the Senate chamber, not in front of a crowd—but their core remains, sustained and strengthened by each abiding generation.</p>
			<p>The inaugural address—often the first speech that a president delivers in their new role—contains the hopes, dreams, and soul of the United States of America. No matter the length, the president lets their fellow Americans know what the country is facing and how they intend to confront those challenges. War or peace, recession or boom—whatever challenge the nation faces, the transfer of power has occurred. It is not always a statement of policy, but of resolve—the resolve to leave the nation in a better state, well-positioned to capture the winds of change and to meet the trials head-on.</p>
			<p>Though written to suit its time, it may be a timeless speech. Abraham Lincoln's storied second inaugural address, FDR's first, and JFK's are often quoted to this day. But we cannot forget that even they were written for the times. And when we read the inaugural address out of context, we are in danger of losing that thread. Beyond the platitudes, what would the incoming president be dealing with? If on their second term, what were they already dealing with? How would their term measure up to their ideal? Hindsight is 20/20, but the orator does not have that benefit when they speak to a nation's future, and all that entails. Their decisions could have drastic implications down the road—for better or worse.</p>
			<p>The essays that follow are not meant to be a panegyric or invective of the president in question; nor are they meant to be an in-depth look at a respective presidency—after all, entire books are written about single events that occur during a presidency. Rather, they are meant to provide context for the inaugural address. What might've been going through the president's mind when they wrote the address? Who, or what, might've influenced their writing? And as a president does not operate in a vacuum, the decisions made by a predecessor could come to a head during their term. The throughline of the executive office ties them all together, and each is the inheritor of a legacy that stretches back to 1789.</p>
			<p>A couple of notes on the addresses that follow. There have been 58 inaugural addresses across 45 presidents. A further 3 are not inaugural addresses proper, but a speech the president delivered upon assuming the presidency. Herein, they are referred to as that presidents "Address Upon Assuming the Office of President of the United States." 2 presidents—Millard Fillmore, who was inaugurated after the death of Zachary Taylor; and Andrew Johnson, inaugurated after the assassination of Abraham Lincoln—have neither an inaugural address nor something that can be considered an address upon becoming president. Two options remained: skip them entirely or use the closest thing. The latter, I believe, is the correct option. And so I use the text in closest proximity—the message they delivered upon becoming president. I thought it would be more egregious to skip a president than to justify the text that most closely resembles the inaugural address, though it will remain an imperfect choice. For presidents that served out a partial term and were re-elected to an additional term, I used the inaugural address given before the beginning of their full-term only—not the message they gave upon the death of their predecessor.</p>
			<p>As we begin the transition of power anew, it is essential to look back at where we started and where we are now. Nations are built on tradition and ideals—the inaugural address represents both for the United States of America. Whatever the situation, the transition happens, a new president is inaugurated, and we set our eyes towards the future.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Yuvraj Singh</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
