<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Technical Matter</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="technical-matter" epub:type="technical-matter">
			<article id="technical">
				<h2 epub:type="title">Technical Matter</h2>
			</article>
			<p>I hope that by reading the inaugural addresses and essays, you’ve come away with a better understanding of how the United States has reached its current point. Presidents don't live in a vacuum—they are molded by those around them, the times in which they live, and through their experiences. How the Schoolmaster, Woodrow Wilson, approached his presidency was far different from the Tennessee Tailor, Andrew Johnson. And neither had the experiences of Old Hickory, Andrew Jackson, who felt that the presidency was stolen from him in a Corrupt Bargain by John Quincy Adams, the one-term president and son of another one-term president, John Adams. And no president since has come into office with the gravitas, mandate, and support of George Washington, “First in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen,” and the only president to be elected twice by unanimous vote.</p>
			<p>The push and pull between different ideas paved the way for the nation and continues to do so. We all experience life differently, which influences how we think. But that discourse—between true believers that wish for a better world—has built the United States into what it is. The country has faced difficult times and will do so in the future—but as a nation united, it has prevailed.</p>
			<p>This book began as a labor of love in February of 2020. As someone with no background in history or historiography (or editing a book, really), it was a constant learning experience. It was made easier through a combination of factors, with others' generosity being the most significant, followed by the availability of the right tool at the right price (free) and the lack of copyright on the inaugural addresses themselves (freedom). I’ve outlined the steps I took to produce this book—some technical, some not. There is no grand plan that all came together—instead, it was a constant, consistent effort for the better part of a year.</p>
			<p>If the steps help clear the way for someone else to do what I did, it’s worth it. If you have any questions, my email is open: <a href="mailto:yuvraj+mfa@librecron.com">yuvraj+mfa@librecron.com</a>.</p>
			<article id="why-this-book">
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">Why This Book?</h3>
			</article>
			<p>There was no lightbulb moment that <em>this</em> is what I had to do, and I think those kinds of moments are few and far between. I was interested in history and politics, 2020 was an election year, and I stumbled across a transcription of the inaugural addresses on Project Gutenberg. The idea kicked around in my head for a couple of weeks before I decided to act on it. For a project like this, reading plenty is the single most useful thing you can do. You'll discover works that you want to work on. Penguin Classics, Oxford World Classics, and Norton Critical Editions come with extra matter—introductions, notes, critical essays, etc. They helped define the concept of the book, and I ran with it.</p>
			<p>The most important thing is a genuine interest in the topic. It can be anything, not necessarily a collection (like the inaugural addresses are). Critical essays on, say, <em>Dracula</em>, <em>Paradise Lost</em>, <em>Pride &amp; Prejudice</em>, <em>Black Beauty</em>, or anything that catches your interest is just as valid. Or it could be something else—an overall introduction to a book, a close introspection of it, etc. But that genuine interest is important—it’ll keep you going. It isn’t necessarily a requirement, but you’re more likely to get to the end.</p>
			<article id="emails-and-essays">
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">Emails &amp; Essays</h3>
			</article>
			<p>The most important part of the project was the essays. I was familiar with many of the contributors' works, knew them to be experts, or was referred to them by someone else. Each contributor is an expert on the president they wrote about, or their era—and often, more than one. I knew that I could take care of the technical side, but that’s only one (small) part of the equation. The most important thing is the content.</p>
			<p>I reached out to each contributor via email. I <em>never</em> wrote directly into the email app or program. Instead, I did all my writing in a separate text editor (<a href="https://getdrafts.com/">Drafts</a> was my choice) or word processor and then copied the email into my client (<a href="https://sparkmailapp.com/">Spark</a>, which has some extra features that came in useful). This is for two main reasons:</p>
			<ol>
				<li><p>I prefer to spend as little time in email as possible. This is one of those things you learn about yourself through observation. Continually checking my email and paying attention to the notifications was detrimental to the work at hand, so I sequestered email to different, specific parts of the day. (Though I often fell short of my ideal.)</p></li>
				<li><p>I didn’t want to send the email until I was completely ready. Doing it in a different editor ensured I wouldn’t just click send. It helped me reduce errors, though some still got through.</p></li>
			</ol>
			<p>Before I had begun emailing, I considered what the overall text required. From the beginning, I knew that what I did <em>not</em> want was something scholarly. The vast majority of readers are not scholars, but as fellow Americans, <em>are</em> concerned with the history, state, and future of the United States. Instead, I was looking for a short description of the situation that surrounded the inaugural and what may have influenced its contents. What might the incoming president have to deal with? What was in store for them down the line? If it was their second term, how was it different from or influenced by the first? We have the benefit of hindsight, after all—while Lincoln didn’t know that his 2nd term would be cut so short, we have an idea of what he intended to do in it. And we know what happened when, instead, Andrew Johnson took the reins.</p>
			<article id="software-and-hardware">
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">Software &amp; Hardware</h3>
			</article>
			<p>I’m well entrenched in the Apple ecosystem, but that is no requirement. You could do something like this with almost anything; powerful hardware is <em>not</em> a requirement. But friendly tools are a joy to work with, so take that as you will.</p>
			<p>I didn’t need much in terms of software or hardware. Everything was created on my MacBook Pro (Retina, Mid 2012) running macOS Catalina. The only other hardware I used was my iPad Air 2 running Apple Books &amp; Kindle to make sure the book looked right; my iPhone 7+ to do the same; and my Kindle Paperwhite (again, to test). On my MBP, I used the Apple Books app and <a href="https://calibre-ebook.com/">Calibre</a> to do the same.</p>
			<p>The <em>most</em> important bit of software was the toolset created by <a href="https://standardebooks.org/">Standard Ebooks</a>, “a volunteer driven, not-for-profit project that produces new editions of public domain ebooks that are lovingly formatted, open source, and free.” The toolset is available on <a href="https://github.com/standardebooks/tools">GitHub</a> and is free to use. It requires some bit of technical knowledge, but nothing too complicated. A comprehensive <a href="https://standardebooks.org/contribute/producing-an-ebook-step-by-step">step-by-step</a> guide is available, and you can get started by producing an ebook with them. However, the toolset is geared towards working on <em>existing books</em> found on Project Gutenberg—<em>not</em> towards writing new ones. For the latter, you may want to explore different software such as <a href="https://vellum.pub/">Vellum</a>, which lets you create beautiful books (at a price—$199 for ebooks, $249 for ebooks + paperbacks). I used Vellum once to test it out and it’s nice—but my experience ended at the free trial. If you want to write full works from scratch, <a href="https://www.literatureandlatte.com/scrivener/overview">Scrivener</a> is a joy to use, as is <a href="https://ulysses.app/">Ulysses</a>. However, a tool only ever makes the writing enjoyable—it cannot make your writing <em>better</em>. That requires practice and lots of it. Virtually any text editor will do if you want to write. Just be sure it can output to .docx if you need to submit a manuscript; that wasn’t the case here, as the Standard Ebooks toolset just builds the needed ebook files.</p>
			<p>Towards the end, as I added the endnotes, I knew that I would have to write the same thing over and over again. This is the kind of thing that is ripe to be automated. One thing to note when it comes to automation: it is often not a good idea to try and preemptively automate tasks. Rather, you will find that your <em>conception</em> of the task and the <em>reality</em> of it are enough at odds to make your automation fall short. It is better to consider the task and <em>then</em> automate it if possible. To enter an endnote using the Standard Ebooks toolset, I would need to write the string <code>&lt;a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-#" id="noteref-#" epub:type="noteref"&gt;#&lt;/a&gt;</code>, where <code>#</code> is an endnote number. This is the sort of thing that you can easily write wrong. I used another bit of software, <a href="https://www.keyboardmaestro.com/">Keyboard Maestro</a>, to instead write it for me. I wrote a short snippet called <code>;senote</code> (it could be anything; I chose that because it was easy to remember) so that whenever I invoked it, I would be prompted for a number (which would be equal to the endnote number in this case). The number would then be automatically inserted in place of <code>#</code> with the rest of the string. This cut down significantly on how much I needed to write and made typos less likely to occur.</p>
			<p>The words you’re reading now were written in <a href="https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/">GNU Emacs</a>, “an extensible, customizable, free/libre text editor.” Specifically, it was written in the <code>markdown-mode</code> major mode and <code>olivetti-mode</code> minor mode, which made it appealing to my eyes. Emacs is available on Windows, macOS, and probably all Linux distributions. There is a learning curve associated with the editor. I’m not a power user, but I do enjoy using it. Simpler options exist - Microsoft Word (the standard for manuscript writing), Apple Pages, Scrivener, Ulysses, and more. If I had a thought come to me and I was away from my laptop, I would use Drafts on iOS to capture it and transfer it to Emacs, to the necessary document, when I had the time. Emails were the only thing I kept in Drafts and, when done, deleted.</p>
			<p>I preferred to use Emacs because it got out of the way and let me focus on my writing. All I needed (and wanted) was a blank slate, and it excels at providing that. Each bit of writing required multiple passes and rounds of editing.</p>
			<p>It ought to be noted that the tool is always ancillary to the writing. While the right tool can make a job easier, more than one tool can accomplish a particular task. Most any text editor will do, though if you plan to work with an editor, make sure that you can output to Microsoft Word. While there are workarounds, simplicity is often underrated. Just because something is hard doesn’t mean it’s good, and the simplest route is not only the path of least resistance but of the least errors. Use what you enjoy and what will get you to the finish line with the least amount of hurdles. <em>That</em> is often the right tool.</p>
			<article id="whats-next">
				<h3 epub:type="subtitle">What’s Next?</h3>
			</article>
			<p>I anticipate I’ll continue to work on books like this, though the next few will be shorter. I’m interested to see far we can take ebooks as a medium, as they offer obvious advantages over traditional books. I intend to update this book every time a presidential term ends, but it might evolve in other ways as well.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
