<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Uncopyright</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/se.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="uncopyright" epub:type="copyright-page">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Uncopyright</h2>
			<p>This entire production is made possible thanks to the hard work done by <a href="https://alexcabal.com/">Alex Cabal</a> and all the fantastic volunteers over at <a href="https://standardebooks.org">Standard Ebooks</a>.</p>
			<p>The text of this work is being released under the terms of the <a href="https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/">CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication</a>. In plainest terms, you are free to do with this book what you would like, for commercial or noncommercial purposes, with or without attribution. That extends to the metadata, colophon, imprint, titlepage, uncopyright, and other aspects of text that might belong to the person who did the work to modernize this book. What you may do with this work includes but is not limited to: repurpose, resell, repackage, reuse, and adapt.</p>
			<p>Librecron has three goals: to curate, expand, and modernize the public domain.</p>
			<ol>
				<li><p><strong>Curate</strong>: Highlight and modernize the best texts that the public domain has to offer (short stories, poems, novels, or other works).</p></li>
				<li><p><strong>Modernize</strong>: Make the work more accessible and a cleaner read for modern readers.</p></li>
				<li><p><strong>Expand</strong>: Ensure the longevity of the work and make sure others can build upon it, if they so choose.</p></li>
			</ol>
			<p>
				<strong>Librecron offers this ebook as-is and make no representations or warranties of any kind concerning this ebook, express, implied, statutory or otherwise, including without limitation warranties of title, merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, non infringement, or the absence of latent or other defects, accuracy, or the presence or absence of errors, whether or not discoverable, all to the greatest extent permissible under applicable law.</strong>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>